
More Praise for Rework
"In typical 37signals fashion, the wisdom in these pages is edgy yet simple,
straightforward, and proven ... Read this book multiple times to help give you
the courage you need to get out there and make something great."
--Tony Hsieh, CEO, Zappos.com
"The brilliance of Rework is that it inspires you to rethink everything you
thought you knew about strategy, customers, and getting things done."
--William C. Taylor, founding editor of Fast Company and coauthor of
Mavericks at Work
"For me, Rework posed a new challenge: stifling the urge to rip out each page
and tape it to my wall ... Amazing, powerful, inspirational--those adjectives
might make me sound like a fawning fan, but Rework is that useful. After
you've finished it, be prepared for a new feeling of clarity and motivation."
--Kathy Sierra, co-creator of the bestselling Head First series and founder of
javaranch.com
"Inspirational ... In a world where we all keep getting asked to do more with
less, the authors show us how to do less and create more."
--Scott Rosenberg, cofounder of Salon.com and author of Dreaming in Code
and Say Everything
"Leave your sacred cows in the barn and let 37signals' unconventional
wisdom and experience show you the way to business success in the twentyfirst century. No MBA jargon or consultant-speak allowed. Just practical
advice we can all use. Great stuff."
--Saul Kaplan, chief catalyst, Business Innovation Factory
"Appealingly intimate, as if you're having coffee with the authors. Rework is
not just smart and succinct but grounded in the concreteness of doing rather
than hard-to-apply philosophizing. This book inspired me to trust myself in
defying the status quo."
--Penelope Trunk, author of Brazen Careerist: The New Rules for Success
"[This book's] assumption is that an organization is a piece of software.
Editable. Malleable. Sharable. Fault-tolerant. Comfortable in Beta.
Reworkable. The authors live by the credo 'keep it simple, stupid' and Rework
possesses the same intelligence--and irreverence--of that simple adage."
--John Maeda, author of The Laws of Simplicity
"Rework is like its authors: fast-moving, iconoclastic, and inspiring. It's not
just for startups. Anyone who works can learn from this."
--Jessica Livingston, partner, Y Combinator; author, Founders at Work
INTRODUCTION
FIRST
The new reality
TAKEDOWNS
Ignore the real world
Learning from mistakes is overrated
Planning is guessing
Why grow?
Workaholism
Enough with "entrepreneurs"
GO
Make a dent in the universe
Scratch your own itch
Start making something
No time is no excuse
Draw a line in the sand
Mission statement impossible
Outside money is Plan Z
You need less than you think
Start a business, not a startup
Building to flip is building to flop
Less mass
PROGRESS
Embrace constraints
Build half a product, not a half-assed product
Start at the epicenter
Ignore the details early on
Making the call is making progress
Be a curator
Throw less at the problem
Focus on what won't change
Tone is in your fingers
Sell your by-products
Launch now
PRODUCTIVITY
Illusions of agreement
Reasons to quit
Interruption is the enemy of productivity
Meetings are toxic
Good enough is fine
Quick wins
Don't be a hero
Go to sleep
Your estimates suck
Long lists don't get done
Make tiny decisions
COMPETITORS
Don't copy
Decommoditize your product
Pick a fight
Underdo your competition
Who cares what they're doing?
EVOLUTION
Say no by default
Let your customers outgrow you
Don't confuse enthusiasm with priority
Be at-home good
Don't write it down
PROMOTION
Welcome obscurity
Build an audience
Out-teach your competition
Emulate chefs
Go behind the scenes
Nobody likes plastic flowers
Press releases are spam
Forget about the Wall Street Journal
Drug dealers get it right
Marketing is not a department
The myth of the overnight sensation
HIRING
Do it yourself first
Hire when it hurts
Pass on great people
Strangers at a cocktail party
Resumes are ridiculous
Years of irrelevance
Forget about formal education
Everybody works
Hire managers of one
Hire great writers
The best are everywhere
Test-drive employees
DAMAGE CONTROL
Own your bad news
Speed changes everything
How to say you're sorry
Put everyone on the front lines
Take a deep breath
CULTURE
You don't create a culture
Decisions are temporary
Skip the rock stars
They're not thirteen
Send people home at 5
Don't scar on the first cut
Sound like you
Four-letter words
ASAP is poison
CONCLUSION
Inspiration is perishable
RESOURCES
About 37signals
37signals products
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CHAPTER
INTRODUCTION
We have something new to say about building, running, and growing (or not
growing) a business.
This book isn't based on academic theories. It's based on our experience.
We've been in business for more than ten years. Along the way, we've seen two
recessions, one burst bubble, business-model shifts, and doom-and-gloom
predictions come and go--and we've remained profitable through it all.
We're an intentionally small company that makes software to help small
companies and groups get things done the easy way. More than 3 million people
around the world use our products.
We started out in 1999 as a three-person Web-design consulting firm. In 2004,
we weren't happy with the project-management software used by the rest of the
industry, so we created our own: Basecamp. When we showed the online tool to
clients and colleagues, they all said the same thing: "We need this for our
business too." Five years later, Basecamp generates millions of dollars a year in
profits.
We now sell other online tools too. Highrise, our contact manager and simple
CRM (customer relationship management) tool, is used by tens of thousands of
small businesses to keep track of leads, deals, and more than 10 million contacts.
More than 500,000 people have signed up for Backpack, our intranet and
knowledge-sharing tool. And people have sent more than 100 million messages
using Campfire, our real-time business chat tool. We also invented and opensourced a computer-programming framework called Ruby on Rails that powers
much of the Web 2.0 world.
Some people consider us an Internet company, but that makes us cringe.
Internet companies are known for hiring compulsively, spending wildly, and
failing spectacularly. That's not us. We're small (sixteen people as this book goes
to press), frugal, and profitable.
A lot of people say we can't do what we do. They call us a fluke. They advise
others to ignore our advice. Some have even called us irresponsible, reckless,
and--gasp!--unprofessional.
These critics don't understand how a company can reject growth, meetings,
budgets, boards of directors, advertising, salespeople, and "the real world," yet
thrive. That's their problem, not ours. They say you need to sell to the Fortune
500. Screw that. We sell to the Fortune 5,000,000.
They don't think you can have employees who almost never see each other
spread out across eight cities on two continents. They say you can't succeed
without making financial projections and five-year plans. They're wrong.
They say you need a PR firm to make it into the pages of Time, Business
Week, Inc., Fast Company, the New York Times, the Financial Times, the
Chicago Tribune, the Atlantic, Entrepreneur, and Wired. They're wrong. They
say you can't share your recipes and bare your secrets and still withstand the
competition. Wrong again.
They say you can't possibly compete with the big boys without a hefty
marketing and advertising budget. They say you can't succeed by building
products that do less than your competition's. They say you can't make it all up
as you go. But that's exactly what we've done.
They say a lot of things. We say they're wrong. We've proved it. And we wrote
this book to show you how to prove them wrong too.
First, we'll start out by gutting business. We'll take it down to the studs and
explain why it's time to throw out the traditional notions of what it takes to run a
business. Then we'll rebuild it. You'll learn how to begin, why you need less than
you think, when to launch, how to get the word out, whom (and when) to hire,
and how to keep it all under control.
Now, let's get on with it.
CHAPTER
FIRST
The new reality
This is a different kind of business book for different kinds of people--from
those who have never dreamed of starting a business to those who already have a
successful company up and running.
It's for hard-core entrepreneurs, the Type A go-getters of the business world.
People who feel like they were born to start, lead, and conquer.
It's also for less intense small-business owners. People who may not be Type
A but still have their business at the center of their lives. People who are looking
for an edge that'll help them do more, work smarter, and kick ass.
It's even for people stuck in day jobs who have always dreamed about doing
their own thing. Maybe they like what they do, but they don't like their boss. Or
maybe they're just bored. They want to do something they love and get paid for
it.
Finally, it's for all those people who've never considered going out on their
own and starting a business. Maybe they don't think they're cut out for it. Maybe
they don't think they have the time, money, or conviction to see it through.
Maybe they're just afraid of putting themselves on the line. Or maybe they just
think business is a dirty word. Whatever the reason, this book is for them, too.
There's a new reality. Today anyone can be in business. Tools that used to be
out of reach are now easily accessible. Technology that cost thousands is now
just a few bucks or even free. One person can do the job of two or three or, in
some cases, an entire department. Stuff that was impossible just a few years ago
is simple today.
You don't have to work miserable 60/80/100-hour weeks to make it work. 10-
40 hours a week is plenty. You don't have to deplete your life savings or take on
a boatload of risk. Starting a business on the side while keeping your day job can
provide all the cash flow you need. You don't even need an office. Today you
can work from home or collaborate with people you've never met who live
thousands of miles away.
It's time to rework work. Let's get started.
CHAPTER
TAKEDOWNS
Ignore the real world
"That would never work in the real world." You hear it all the time when you tell
people about a fresh idea.
This real world sounds like an awfully depressing place to live. It's a place
where new ideas, unfamiliar approaches, and foreign concepts always lose. The
only things that win are what people already know and do, even if those things
are flawed and inefficient.
Scratch the surface and you'll find these "real world" inhabitants are filled
with pessimism and despair. They expect fresh concepts to fail. They assume
society isn't ready for or capable of change.
Even worse, they want to drag others down into their tomb. If you're hopeful
and ambitious, they'll try to convince you your ideas are impossible. They'll say
you're wasting your time.
Don't believe them. That world may be real for them, but it doesn't mean you
have to live in it.
We know because our company fails the real-world test in all kinds of ways.
In the real world, you can't have more than a dozen employees spread out in
eight different cities on two continents. In the real world, you can't attract
millions of customers without any salespeople or advertising. In the real world,
you can't reveal your formula for success to the rest of the world. But we've done
all those things and prospered.
The real world isn't a place, it's an excuse. It's a justification for not trying. It
has nothing to do with you.

Learning from mistakes is overrated
In the business world, failure has become an expected rite of passage. You hear
all the time how nine out of ten new businesses fail. You hear that your
business's chances are slim to none. You hear that failure builds character.
People advise, "Fail early and fail often."
With so much failure in the air, you can't help but breathe it in. Don't inhale.
Don't get fooled by the stats. Other people's failures are just that: other people's
failures.
If other people can't market their product, it has nothing to do with you. If
other people can't build a team, it has nothing to do with you. If other people
can't price their services properly, it has nothing to do with you. If other people
can't earn more than they spend ... well, you get it.
Another common misconception: You need to learn from your mistakes. What
do you really learn from mistakes? You might learn what not to do again, but
how valuable is that? You still don't know what you should do next.
Contrast that with learning from your successes. Success gives you real
ammunition. When something succeeds, you know what worked--and you can
do it again. And the next time, you'll probably do it even better.
Failure is not a prerequisite for success. A Harvard Business School study
found already-successful entrepreneurs are far more likely to succeed again (the
success rate for their future companies is 34 percent). But entrepreneurs whose
companies failed the first time had almost the same follow-on success rate as
people starting a company for the first time: just 23 percent. People who failed
before have the same amount of success as people who have never tried at all.
*
Success is the experience that actually counts.
That shouldn't be a surprise: It's exactly how nature works. Evolution doesn't
linger on past failures, it's always building upon what worked. So should you.

Planning is guessing
Unless you're a fortune-teller, long-term business planning is a fantasy. There are
just too many factors that are out of your hands: market conditions, competitors,
customers, the economy, etc. Writing a plan makes you feel in control of things
you can't actually control.
Why don't we just call plans what they really are: guesses. Start referring to
your business plans as business guesses, your financial plans as financial
guesses, and your strategic plans as strategic guesses. Now you can stop
worrying about them as much. They just aren't worth the stress.
When you turn guesses into plans, you enter a danger zone. Plans let the past
drive the future. They put blinders on you. "This is where we're going because,
well, that's where we said we were going." And that's the problem: Plans are
inconsistent with improvisation.
And you have to be able to improvise. You have to be able to pick up
opportunities that come along. Sometimes you need to say, "We're going in a
new direction because that's what makes sense today."
The timing of long-range plans is screwed up too. You have the most
information when you're doing something, not before you've done it. Yet when
do you write a plan? Usually it's before you've even begun. That's the worst time
to make a big decision.
Now this isn't to say you shouldn't think about the future or contemplate how
you might attack upcoming obstacles. That's a worthwhile exercise. Just don't
feel you need to write it down or obsess about it. If you write a big plan, you'll
most likely never look at it anyway. Plans more than a few pages long just wind
up as fossils in your file cabinet.
Give up on the guesswork. Decide what you're going to do this week, not this
year. Figure out the next most important thing and do that. Make decisions right
before you do something, not far in advance.
It's OK to wing it. Just get on the plane and go. You can pick up a nicer shirt,
shaving cream, and a toothbrush once you get there.
Working without a plan may seem scary. But blindly following a plan that has
no relationship with reality is even scarier.

Why grow?
People ask, "How big is your company?" It's small talk, but they're not looking
for a small answer. The bigger the number, the more impressive, professional,
and powerful you sound. "Wow, nice!" they'll say if you have a hundred-plus
employees. If you're small, you'll get an "Oh ... that's nice." The former is meant
as a compliment; the latter is said just to be polite.
Why is that? What is it about growth and business? Why is expansion always
the goal? What's the attraction of big besides ego? (You'll need a better answer
than "economies of scale.") What's wrong with finding the right size and staying
there?
Do we look at Harvard or Oxford and say, "If they'd only expand and branch
out and hire thousands more professors and go global and open other campuses
all over the world ... then they'd be great schools." Of course not. That's not how
we measure the value of these institutions. So why is it the way we measure
businesses?
Maybe the right size for your company is five people. Maybe it's forty. Maybe
it's two hundred. Or maybe it's just you and a laptop. Don't make assumptions
about how big you should be ahead of time. Grow slow and see what feels right-
-premature hiring is the death of many companies. And avoid huge growth
spurts too--they can cause you to skip right over your appropriate size.
Small is not just a stepping-stone. Small is a great destination in itself.
Have you ever noticed that while small businesses wish they were bigger, big
businesses dream about being more agile and flexible? And remember, once you
get big, it's really hard to shrink without firing people, damaging morale, and
changing the entire way you do business.
Ramping up doesn't have to be your goal. And we're not talking just about the
number of employees you have either. It's also true for expenses, rent, IT
infrastructure, furniture, etc. These things don't just happen to you. You decide
whether or not to take them on. And if you do take them on, you'll be taking on
new headaches, too. Lock in lots of expenses and you force yourself into
building a complex businesss--one that's a lot more difficult and stressful to run.
Don't be insecure about aiming to be a small business. Anyone who runs a
business that's sustainable and profitable, whether it's big or small, should be
proud.

Workaholism
Our culture celebrates the idea of the workaholic. We hear about people burning
the midnight oil. They pull all-nighters and sleep at the office. It's considered a
badge of honor to kill yourself over a project. No amount of work is too much
work.
Not only is this workaholism unnecessary, it's stupid. Working more doesn't
mean you care more or get more done. It just means you work more.
Workaholics wind up creating more problems than they solve. First off,
working like that just isn't sustainable over time. When the burnout crash comes-
-and it will--it'll hit that much harder.
Workaholics miss the point, too. They try to fix problems by throwing sheer
hours at them. They try to make up for intellectual laziness with brute force. This
results in inelegant solutions.
They even create crises. They don't look for ways to be more efficient because
they actually like working overtime. They enjoy feeling like heroes. They create
problems (often unwittingly) just so they can get off on working more.
Workaholics make the people who don't stay late feel inadequate for "merely"
working reasonable hours. That leads to guilt and poor morale all around. Plus, it
leads to an ass-in-seat mentality--people stay late out of obligation, even if they
aren't really being productive.
If all you do is work, you're unlikely to have sound judgments. Your values
and decision making wind up skewed. You stop being able to decide what's
worth extra effort and what's not. And you wind up just plain tired. No one
makes sharp decisions when tired.
In the end, workaholics don't actually accomplish more than nonworkaholics.
They may claim to be perfectionists, but that just means they're wasting time
fixating on inconsequential details instead of moving on to the next task.
Workaholics aren't heroes. They don't save the day, they just use it up. The
real hero is already home because she figured out a faster way to get things done.

Enough with "entrepreneurs"
Let's retire the term entrepreneur. It's outdated and loaded with baggage. It
smells like a members-only club. Everyone should be encouraged to start his
own business, not just some rare breed that self-identifies as entrepreneurs.
There's a new group of people out there starting businesses. They're turning
profits yet never think of themselves as entrepreneurs. A lot of them don't even
think of themselves as business owners. They are just doing what they love on
their own terms and getting paid for it.
So let's replace the fancy-sounding word with something a bit more down-toearth. Instead of entrepreneurs, let's just call them starters. Anyone who creates a
new business is a starter. You don't need an MBA, a certificate, a fancy suit, a
briefcase, or an above-average tolerance for risk. You just need an idea, a touch
of confidence, and a push to get started.
*Leslie Berlin, "Try, Try Again, or Maybe Not," New York Times, Mar. 21,
2009.
CHAPTER
GO
Make a dent in the universe
To do great work, you need to feel that you're making a difference. That you're
putting a meaningful dent in the universe. That you're part of something
important.
This doesn't mean you need to find the cure for cancer. It's just that your
efforts need to feel valuable. You want your customers to say, "This makes my
life better." You want to feel that if you stopped doing what you do, people
would notice.
You should feel an urgency about this too. You don't have forever. This is your
life's work. Do you want to build just another me-too product or do you want to
shake things up? What you do is your legacy. Don't sit around and wait for
someone else to make the change you want to see. And don't think it takes a
huge team to make that difference either.
Look at Craigslist, which demolished the traditional classified-ad business.
With just a few dozen employees, the company generates tens of millions in
revenue, has one of the most popular sites on the Internet, and disrupted the
entire newspaper business.
The Drudge Report, run by Matt Drudge, is just one simple page on the Web
run by one guy. Yet it's had a huge impact on the news industry--television
producers, radio talk show hosts and newspaper reporters routinely view it as the
go-to place for new stories.
*
If you're going to do something, do something that matters. These little guys
came out of nowhere and destroyed old models that had been around for
decades. You can do the same in your industry.

Scratch your own itch
The easiest, most straightforward way to create a great product or service is to
make something you want to use. That lets you design what you know--and
you'll figure out immediately whether or not what you're making is any good.
At 37signals, we build products we need to run our own business. For
example, we wanted a way to keep track of whom we talked to, what we said,
and when we need to follow up next. So we created Highrise, our contactmanagement software. There was no need for focus groups, market studies, or
middlemen. We had the itch, so we scratched it.
When you build a product or service, you make the call on hundreds of tiny
decisions each day. If you're solving someone else's problem, you're constantly
stabbing in the dark. When you solve your own problem, the light comes on.
You know exactly what the right answer is.
Inventor James Dyson scratched his own itch. While vacuuming his home, he
realized his bag vacuum cleaner was constantly losing suction power--dust kept
clogging the pores in the bag and blocking the airflow. It wasn't someone else's
imaginary problem; it was a real one that he experienced firsthand. So he
decided to solve the problem and came up with the world's first cyclonic, bagless
vacuum cleaner.
*
Vic Firth came up with the idea of making a better drumstick while playing
timpani for the Boston Symphony Orchestra. The sticks he could buy
commercially didn't measure up to the job, so he began making and selling
drumsticks from his basement at home. Then one day he dropped a bunch of
sticks on the floor and heard all the different pitches. That's when he began to
match up sticks by moisture content, weight, density, and pitch so they were
identical pairs. The result became his product's tag line: "the perfect pair." Today,
Vic Firth's factory turns out more than 85,000 drumsticks a day and has a 62
percent share in the drumstick market.
+
Track coach Bill Bowerman decided that his team needed better, lighter
running shoes. So he went out to his workshop and poured rubber into the family
waffle iron. That's how Nike's famous waffle sole was born.
++
These people scratched their own itch and exposed a huge market of people
who needed exactly what they needed. That's how you should do it too.
When you build what you need, you can also assess the quality of what you
make quickly and directly, instead of by proxy.
Mary Kay Wagner, founder of Mary Kay Cosmetics, knew her skin-care
products were great because she used them herself. She got them from a local
cosmetologist who sold homemade formulas to patients, relatives, and friends.
When the cosmetologist passed away, Wagner bought the formulas from the
family. She didn't need focus groups or studies to know the products were good.
She just had to look at her own skin.
*
Best of all, this "solve your own problem" approach lets you fall in love with
what you're making. You know the problem and the value of its solution
intimately. There's no substitute for that. After all, you'll (hopefully) be working
on this for years to come. Maybe even the rest of your life. It better be something
you really care about.
Start making something
We all have that one friend who says, "I had the idea for eBay. If only I had
acted on it, I'd be a billionaire!" That logic is pathetic and delusional. Having the
idea for eBay has nothing to do with actually creating eBay. What you do is what
matters, not what you think or say or plan.
Think your idea's that valuable? Then go try to sell it and see what you get for
it. Not much is probably the answer. Until you actually start making something,
your brilliant idea is just that, an idea. And everyone's got one of those.
Stanley Kubrick gave this advice to aspiring filmmakers: "Get hold of a
camera and some film and make a movie of any kind at all."
* Kubrick knew that
when you're new at something, you need to start creating. The most important
thing is to begin. So get a camera, hit Record, and start shooting.
Ideas are cheap and plentiful. The original pitch idea is such a small part of a
business that it's almost negligible. The real question is how well you execute.

No time is no excuse
The most common excuse people give: "There's not enough time." They claim
they'd love to start a company, learn an instrument, market an invention, write a
book, or whatever, but there just aren't enough hours in the day.
Come on. There's always enough time if you spend it right. And don't think
you have to quit your day job, either. Hang onto it and start work on your project
at night.
Instead of watching TV or playing World of Warcraft, work on your idea.
Instead of going to bed at ten, go to bed at eleven. We're not talking about allnighters or sixteen-hour days--we're talking about squeezing out a few extra
hours a week. That's enough time to get something going.
Once you do that, you'll learn whether your excitement and interest is real or
just a passing phase. If it doesn't pan out, you just keep going to work every day
like you've been doing all along. You didn't risk or lose anything, other than a bit
of time, so it's no big deal.
When you want something bad enough, you make the time--regardless of your
other obligations. The truth is most people just don't want it bad enough. Then
they protect their ego with the excuse of time. Don't let yourself off the hook
with excuses. It's entirely your responsibility to make your dreams come true.
Besides, the perfect time never arrives. You're always too young or old or
busy or broke or something else. If you constantly fret about timing things
perfectly, they'll never happen.

Draw a line in the sand
As you get going, keep in mind why you're doing what you're doing. Great
businesses have a point of view, not just a product or service. You have to
believe in something. You need to have a backbone. You need to know what
you're willing to fight for. And then you need to show the world.
A strong stand is how you attract superfans. They point to you and defend
you. And they spread the word further, wider, and more passionately than any
advertising could.
Strong opinions aren't free. You'll turn some people off. They'll accuse you of
being arrogant and aloof. That's life. For everyone who loves you, there will be
others who hate you. If no one's upset by what you're saying, you're probably not
pushing hard enough. (And you're probably boring, too.)
Lots of people hate us because our products do less than the competition's.
They're insulted when we refuse to include their pet feature. But we're just as
proud of what our products don't do as we are of what they do.
We design them to be simple because we believe most software is too
complex: too many features, too many buttons, too much confusion. So we build
software that's the opposite of that. If what we make isn't right for everyone,
that's OK. We're willing to lose some customers if it means that others love our
products intensely. That's our line in the sand.
When you don't know what you believe, everything becomes an argument.
Everything is debatable. But when you stand for something, decisions are
obvious.
For example, Whole Foods stands for selling the highest quality natural and
organic products available. They don't waste time deciding over and over again
what's appropriate. No one asks, "Should we sell this product that has artificial
flavors?" There's no debate. The answer is clear. That's why you can't buy a
Coke or a Snickers there.
This belief means the food is more expensive at Whole Foods. Some haters
even call it Whole Paycheck and make fun of those who shop there. But so
what? Whole Foods is doing pretty damn well.
Another example is Vinnie's Sub Shop, just down the street from our office in
Chicago. They put this homemade basil oil on subs that's just perfect. You better
show up on time, though. Ask when they close and the woman behind the
counter will respond, "We close when the bread runs out."
Really? "Yeah. We get our bread from the bakery down the street early in the
morning, when it's the freshest. Once we run out (usually around two or three
p.m.), we close up shop. We could get more bread later in the day, but it's not as
good as the fresh-baked bread in the morning. There's no point in selling a few
more sandwiches if the bread isn't good. A few bucks isn't going to make up for
selling food we can't be proud of."
Wouldn't you rather eat at a place like that instead of some generic sandwich
chain?
Mission statement impossible
There's a world of difference between truly standing for something and having a
mission statement that says you stand for something. You know, those
"providing the best service" signs that are created just to be posted on a wall.
The ones that sound phony and disconnected from reality.
Imagine you're standing in a rental-car office. The room's cold. The carpet is
dirty. There's no one at the counter. And then you see a tattered piece of paper
with some clip art at the top of it pinned to a bulletin board. It's a mission
statement:
Our mission is to fulfill the automotive and commercial truck rental, leasing,
car sales and related needs of our customers and, in doing so, exceed their
expectations for service, quality and value.
We will strive to earn our customers' long-term loyalty by working to
deliver more than promised, being honest and fair and "going the extra mile"
to provide exceptional personalized service that creates a pleasing business
experience.
We must motivate our employees to provide exceptional service to our
customers by supporting their development, providing opportunities for
personal growth and fairly compensating them for their successes and
achievements ...
*
And it drones on. And you're sitting there reading this crap and wondering,
"What kind of idiot do they take me for?" The words on the paper are clearly
disconnected from the reality of the experience.
It's like when you're on hold and a recorded voice comes on telling you how
much the company values you as a customer. Really? Then maybe you should
hire some more support people so I don't have to wait thirty minutes to get help.
Or just say nothing. But don't give me an automated voice that's telling me
how much you care about me. It's a robot. I know the difference between
genuine affection and a robot that's programmed to say nice things.
Standing for something isn't just about writing it down. It's about believing it
and living it.

Outside money is Plan Z
One of the first questions you'll probably ask: Where's the seed money going to
come from? Far too often, people think the answer is to raise money from
outsiders. If you're building something like a factory or restaurant, then you may
indeed need that outside cash. But a lot of companies don't need expensive
infrastructure--especially these days.
We're in a service economy now. Service businesses (e.g., consultants,
software companies, wedding planners, graphic designers, and hundreds of
others) don't require much to get going. If you're running a business like that,
avoid outside funding.
In fact, no matter what kind of business you're starting, take on as little outside
cash as you can. Spending other people's money may sound great, but there's a
noose attached. Here's why:
You give up control. When you turn to outsiders for funding, you have to
answer to them too. That's fine at first, when everyone agrees. But what
happens down the road? Are you starting your own business to take orders
from someone else? Raise money and that's what you'll wind up doing.
"Cashing out" begins to trump building a quality business. Investors want
their money back--and quickly (usually three to five years). Long-term
sustainability goes out the window when those involved only want to cash out
as soon as they can.
Spending other people's money is addictive. There's nothing easier than
spending other people's money. But then you run out and need to go back for
more. And every time you go back, they take more of your company.
It's usually a bad deal. When you're just beginning, you have no leverage.
That's a terrible time to enter into any financial transaction.
Customers move down the totem pole. You wind up building what
investors want instead of what customers want.
Raising money is incredibly distracting. Seeking funding is difficult and
draining. It takes months of pitch meetings, legal maneuvering, contracts, etc.
That's an enormous distraction when you should really be focused on building
something great.
It's just not worth it. We hear over and over from business owners who have
gone down this road and regret it. They usually give a variation on the
investment-hangover story: First, you get that quick investment buzz. But then
you start having meetings with your investors and/or board of directors, and
you're like, "Oh man, what have I gotten myself into?" Now someone else is
calling the shots.
Before you stick your head in that noose, look for another way.
You need less than you think
Do you really need ten people or will two or three do for now?
Do you really need $500,000 or is $50,000 (or $5,000) enough for now?
Do you really need six months or can you make something in two?
Do you really need a big office or can you share office space (or work from
home) for a while?
Do you really need a warehouse or can you rent a small storage space (or use
your garage or basement) or outsource it completely?
Do you really need to buy advertising and hire a PR firm or are there other ways
to get noticed?
Do you really need to build a factory or can you hire someone else to
manufacture your products?
Do you really need an accountant or can you use Quicken and do it yourself?
Do you really need an IT department or can you outsource it?
Do you really need a full-time support person or can you handle inquiries on
your own?
Do you really need to open a retail store or can you sell your product online?
Do you really need fancy business cards, letterhead, and brochures or can you
forego that stuff?
You get the point. Maybe eventually you'll need to go the bigger, more expensive
route, but not right now.
There's nothing wrong with being frugal. When we launched our first product,
we did it on the cheap. We didn't get our own office; we shared space with
another company. We didn't get a bank of servers; we had only one. We didn't
advertise; we promoted by sharing our experiences online. We didn't hire
someone to answer customer e-mails; the company founder answered them
himself. And everything worked out just fine.
Great companies start in garages all the time. Yours can too.

Start a business, not a startup
Ah, the startup. It's a special breed of company that gets a lot of attention
(especially in the tech world).
The start up is a magical place. It's a place where expenses are someone else's
problem. It's a place where that pesky thing called revenue is never an issue. It's
a place where you can spend other people's money until you figure out a way to
make your own. It's a place where the laws of business physics don't apply.
The problem with this magical place is it's a fairy tale. The truth is every
business, new or old, is governed by the same set of market forces and economic
rules. Revenue in, expenses out. Turn a profit or wind up gone.
Startups try to ignore this reality. They are run by people trying to postpone
the inevitable, i.e., that moment when their business has to grow up, turn a profit,
and be a real, sustainable business.
Anyone who takes a "we'll figure out how to profit in the future" attitude to
business is being ridiculous. That's like building a rocket ship but starting off by
saying, "Let's pretend gravity doesn't exist." A business without a path to profit
isn't a business, it's a hobby.
So don't use the idea of a startup as a crutch. Instead, start an actual business.
Actual businesses have to deal with actual things like bills and payroll. Actual
businesses worry about profit from day one. Actual businesses don't mask deep
problems by saying, "It's OK, we're a startup." Act like an actual business and
you'll have a much better shot at succeeding.

Building to flip is building to flop
Another thing you hear a lot: "What's your exit strategy?" You hear it even when
you're just beginning. What is it with people who can't even start building
something without knowing how they're going to leave it? What's the hurry?
Your priorities are out of whack if you're thinking about getting out before you
even dive in.
Would you go into a relationship planning the breakup? Would you write the
prenup on a first date? Would you meet with a divorce lawyer the morning of
your wedding? That would be ridiculous, right?
You need a commitment strategy, not an exit strategy. You should be thinking
about how to make your project grow and succeed, not how you're going to jump
ship. If your whole strategy is based on leaving, chances are you won't get far in
the first place.
You see so many aspiring businesspeople pinning their hopes on selling out.
But the odds of getting acquired are so tiny. There's only a slim chance that some
big suitor will come along and make it all worthwhile. Maybe 1 in 1,000? Or 1
in 10,000?
Plus, when you build a company with the intention of being acquired, you
emphasize the wrong things. Instead of focusing on getting customers to love
you, you worry about who's going to buy you. That's the wrong thing to obsess
over.
And let's say you ignore this advice and do pull off a flip. You build your
business, sell it, and get a nice payday. Then what? Move to an island and sip
pina coladas all day? Will that really satisfy you? Will money alone truly make
you happy? Are you sure you'll like that more than running a business you
actually enjoy and believe in?
That's why you often hear about business owners who sell out, retire for six
months, and then get back in the game. They miss the thing they gave away. And
usually, they're back with a business that isn't nearly as good as their first.
Don't be that guy. If you do manage to get a good thing going, keep it going.
Good things don't come around that often. Don't let your business be the one that
got away.

Less mass
Embrace the idea of having less mass. Right now, you're the smallest, the
leanest, and the fastest you'll ever be. From here on out, you'll start accumulating
mass. And the more massive an object, the more energy required to change its
direction. It's as true in the business world as it is in the physical world. Mass is
increased by ...
Long-term contracts
Excess staff
Permanent decisions
Meetings
Thick process
Inventory (physical or mental)
Hardware, software, and technology lock-ins
Long-term road maps
Office politics
Avoid these things whenever you can. That way, you'll be able to change
direction easily. The more expensive it is to make a change, the less likely you
are to make it.
Huge organizations can take years to pivot. They talk instead of act. They
meet instead of do. But if you keep your mass low, you can quickly change
anything: your entire business model, product, feature set, and/or marketing
message. You can make mistakes and fix them quickly. You can change your
priorities, product mix, or focus. And most important, you can change your
mind.
*Jim Rutenberg, "Clinton Finds Way to Play Along with Drudge," New York
Times, Oct. 22, 2007.
*"Fascinating Facts About James Dyson, Inventor of the Dyson Vacuum
Cleaner in 1978," www.ideafinder.com/history/inventors/dyson.htm
+Russ Mitchell, "The Beat Goes On," CBS News, Sunday Morning, Mar. 29,
2009, www.tinyurl.com/cd8gjq
++Eric Ransdell, "The Nike Story? Just Tell It!" Fast Company, Dec. 19,
2007, www.fastcompany.com/magazine/31/nike.html
*"Mary Kay Ash: Mary Kay Cosmetics," Journal of Business Leadership 1,
no. 1 (Spring 1988); American National Business Hall of Fame,
www.anbhf.org/laureates/mkash.html
*"Stanley Kubrick--Biography," IMDB, www.imdb.com/name/nm00004o/bio
*Mission, Enterprise Rent-a-Car,
http://aboutus.enterprise.com/who_we_are/mission.html
CHAPTER
PROGRESS

Embrace constraints
"I don't have enough time/money/people/experience." Stop whining. Less is a
good thing. Constraints are advantages in disguise. Limited resources force you
to make do with what you've got. There's no room for waste. And that forces you
to be creative.
Ever seen the weapons prisoners make out of soap or a spoon? They make do
with what they've got. Now we're not saying you should go out and shank
somebody--but get creative and you'll be amazed at what you can make with just
a little.
Writers use constraints to force creativity all the time. Shakespeare reveled in
the limitations of sonnets (fourteen-line lyric poems in iambic pentameter with a
specific rhyme scheme). Haiku and limericks also have strict rules that lead to
creative results. Writers like Ernest Hemingway and Raymond Carver found that
forcing themselves to use simple, clear language helped them deliver maximum
impact.
The Price Is Right, the longest-running game show in history, is also a great
example of creativity born from embracing constraints. The show has more than
a hundred games, and each one is based on the question "How much does this
item cost?" That simple formula has attracted fans for more than thirty years.
Southwest--unlike most other airlines, which fly multiple aircraft models--
flies only Boeing 737s. As a result, every Southwest pilot, flight attendant, and
ground-crew member can work any flight. Plus, all of Southwest's parts fit all of
its planes. All that means lower costs and a business that's easier to run. They
made it easy on themselves.
When we were building Basecamp, we had plenty of limitations. We had a
design firm to run with existing client work, a seven-hour time difference
between principals (David was doing the programming in Denmark, the rest of
us were in the States), a small team, and no outside funding. These constraints
forced us to keep the product simple.
These days, we have more resources and people, but we still force constraints.
We make sure to have only one or two people working on a product at a time.
And we always keep features to a minimum. Boxing ourselves in this way
prevents us from creating bloated products.
So before you sing the "not enough" blues, see how far you can get with what
you have.

Build half a product, not a half-assed product
You can turn a bunch of great ideas into a crappy product real fast by trying to
do them all at once. You just can't do everything you want to do and do it well.
You have limited time, resources, ability, and focus. It's hard enough to do one
thing right. Trying to do ten things well at the same time? Forget about it.
So sacrifice some of your darlings for the greater good. Cut your ambition in
half. You're better off with a kick-ass half than a half-assed whole.
Most of your great ideas won't seem all that great once you get some
perspective, anyway. And if they truly are that fantastic, you can always do them
later.
Lots of things get better as they get shorter. Directors cut good scenes to make
a great movie. Musicians drop good tracks to make a great album. Writers
eliminate good pages to make a great book. We cut this book in half between the
next-to-last and final drafts. From 57,000 words to about 27,000 words. Trust us,
it's better for it.
So start chopping. Getting to great starts by cutting out stuff that's merely
good.

Start at the epicenter
When you start anything new, there are forces pulling you in a variety of
directions. There's the stuff you could do, the stuff you want to do, and the stuff
you have to do. The stuff you have to do is where you should begin. Start at the
epicenter.
For example, if you're opening a hot dog stand, you could worry about the
condiments, the cart, the name, the decoration. But the first thing you should
worry about is the hot dog. The hot dogs are the epicenter. Everything else is
secondary.
The way to find the epicenter is to ask yourself this question: "If I took this
away, would what I'm selling still exist?" A hot dog stand isn't a hot dog stand
without the hot dogs. You can take away the onions, the relish, the mustard, etc.
Some people may not like your toppings-less dogs, but you'd still have a hot dog
stand. But you simply cannot have a hot dog stand without any hot dogs.
So figure out your epicenter. Which part of your equation can't be removed? If
you can continue to get by without this thing or that thing, then those things
aren't the epicenter. When you find it, you'll know. Then focus all your energy on
making it the best it can be. Everything else you do depends on that foundation.

Ignore the details early on
Architects don't worry about which tiles go in the shower or which brand of
dishwasher to install in the kitchen until after the floor plan is finalized. They
know it's better to decide these details later.
You need to approach your idea the same way. Details make the difference.
But getting infatuated with details too early leads to disagreement, meetings, and
delays. You get lost in things that don't really matter. You waste time on
decisions that are going to change anyway. So ignore the details--for a while.
Nail the basics first and worry about the specifics later.
When we start designing something, we sketch out ideas with a big, thick
Sharpie marker, instead of a ballpoint pen. Why? Pen points are too fine. They're
too high-resolution. They encourage you to worry about things that you shouldn't
worry about yet, like perfecting the shading or whether to use a dotted or dashed
line. You end up focusing on things that should still be out of focus.
A Sharpie makes it impossible to drill down that deep. You can only draw
shapes, lines, and boxes. That's good. The big picture is all you should be
worrying about in the beginning.
Walt Stanchfield, famed drawing instructor for Walt Disney Studios, used to
encourage animators to "forget the detail" at first. The reason: Detail just doesn't
buy you anything in the early stages.
*
Besides, you often can't recognize the details that matter most until after you
start building. That's when you see what needs more attention. You feel what's
missing. And that's when you need to pay attention, not sooner.

Making the call is making progress
When you put off decisions, they pile up. And piles end up ignored, dealt with in
haste, or thrown out. As a result, the individual problems in those piles stay
unresolved.
Whenever you can, swap "Let's think about it" for "Let's decide on it."
Commit to making decisions. Don't wait for the perfect solution. Decide and
move forward.
You want to get into the rhythm of making choices. When you get in that flow
of making decision after decision, you build momentum and boost morale.
Decisions are progress. Each one you make is a brick in your foundation. You
can't build on top of "We'll decide later," but you can build on top of "Done."
The problem comes when you postpone decisions in the hope that a perfect
answer will come to you later. It won't. You're as likely to make a great call
today as you are tomorrow.
An example from our world: For a long time, we avoided creating an affiliate
program for our products because the "perfect" solution seemed way too
complicated: We'd have to automate payments, mail out checks, figure out
foreign tax laws for overseas affiliates, etc. The breakthrough came when we
asked, "What can we easily do right now that's good enough?" The answer: Pay
affiliates in credit instead of cash. So that's what we did.
We stuck with that approach for a while and then eventually implemented a
system that pays cash. And that's a big part of this: You don't have to live with a
decision forever. If you make a mistake, you can correct it later.
It doesn't matter how much you plan, you'll still get some stuff wrong anyway.
Don't make things worse by overanalyzing and delaying before you even get
going.
Long projects zap morale. The longer it takes to develop, the less likely it is to
launch. Make the call, make progress, and get something out now--while you've
got the motivation and momentum to do so.

Be a curator
You don't make a great museum by putting all the art in the world into a single
room. That's a warehouse. What makes a museum great is the stuff that's not on
the walls. Someone says no. A curator is involved, making conscious decisions
about what should stay and what should go. There's an editing process. There's a
lot more stuff off the walls than on the walls. The best is a sub-sub-subset of all
the possibilities.
It's the stuff you leave out that matters. So constantly look for things to
remove, simplify, and streamline. Be a curator. Stick to what's truly essential.
Pare things down until you're left with only the most important stuff. Then do it
again. You can always add stuff back in later if you need to.
Zingerman's is one of America's best-known delis. And it got that way
because its owners think of themselves as curators. They're not just filling their
shelves. They're curating them.
There's a reason for every olive oil the team at Zingerman's sells: They believe
each one is great. Usually, they've known the supplier for years. They've visited
and picked olives with them. That's why they can vouch for each oil's authentic,
full-bodied flavor.
For example, look how the owner of Zingerman's describes Pasolivo Olive Oil
on the company Web site:
I tasted this oil for the first time years ago, on a random recommendation and
sample. There are plenty of oils that come in nice bottles with very endearing
stories to tell--this was no exception--but most simply aren't that great. By
contrast Pasolivo got my attention as soon as I tasted it. It's powerful, full and
fruity. Everything I like in an oil, without any drawbacks. It still stands as one
of America's best oils, on par with the great rustic oils of Tuscany. Strongly
recommended.
*
The owner actually tried the oil and chooses to carry it based on its taste. It's
not about packaging, marketing, or price. It's about quality. He tried it and knew
his store had to carry it. That's the approach you should take too.

Throw less at the problem
Watch chef Gordon Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares and you'll see a pattern. The
menus at failing restaurants offer too many dishes. The owners think making
every dish under the sun will broaden the appeal of the restaurant. Instead it
makes for crappy food (and creates inventory headaches).
That's why Ramsay's first step is nearly always to trim the menu, usually from
thirty-plus dishes to around ten. Think about that. Improving the current menu
doesn't come first. Trimming it down comes first. Then he polishes what's left.
When things aren't working, the natural inclination is to throw more at the
problem. More people, time, and money. All that ends up doing is making the
problem bigger. The right way to go is the opposite direction: Cut back.
So do less. Your project won't suffer nearly as much as you fear. In fact,
there's a good chance it'll end up even better. You'll be forced to make tough
calls and sort out what truly matters.
If you start pushing back deadlines and increasing your budget, you'll never
stop.

Focus on what won't change
A lot of companies focus on the next big thing. They latch on to what's hot and
new. They follow the latest trends and technology.
That's a fool's path. You start focusing on fashion instead of substance. You
start paying attention to things that are constantly changing instead of things that
last.
The core of your business should be built around things that won't change.
Things that people are going to want today and ten years from now. Those are
the things you should invest in.
Amazon.com focuses on fast (or free) shipping, great selection, friendly return
policies, and affordable prices. These things will always be in high demand.
Japanese automakers also focus on core principles that don't change:
reliability, affordability, and practicality. People wanted those things thirty years
ago, they want them today, and they'll want them thirty years from now.
For 37signals, things like speed, simplicity, ease of use, and clarity are our
focus. Those are timeless desires. People aren't going to wake up in ten years and
say, "Man, I wish software was harder to use." They won't say, "I wish this
application was slower."
Remember, fashion fades away. When you focus on permanent features,
you're in bed with things that never go out of style.

Tone is in your fingers
Guitar gurus say, "Tone is in your fingers." You can buy the same guitar, effects
pedals, and amplifier that Eddie Van Halen uses. But when you play that rig, it's
still going to sound like you.
Likewise, Eddie could plug into a crappy Strat/Pignose setup at a pawn shop,
and you'd still be able to recognize that it's Eddie Van Halen playing. Fancy gear
can help, but the truth is your tone comes from you.
It's tempting for people to obsess over tools instead of what they're going to
do with those tools. You know the type: Designers who use an avalanche of
funky typefaces and fancy Photoshop filters but don't have anything to say.
Amateur photographers who want to debate film versus digital endlessly instead
of focusing on what actually makes a photograph great.
Many amateur golfers think they need expensive clubs. But it's the swing that
matters, not the club. Give Tiger Woods a set of cheap clubs and he'll still
destroy you.
People use equipment as a crutch. They don't want to put in the hours on the
driving range so they spend a ton in the pro shop. They're looking for a shortcut.
But you just don't need the best gear in the world to be good. And you definitely
don't need it to get started.
In business, too many people obsess over tools, software tricks, scaling issues,
fancy office space, lavish furniture, and other frivolities instead of what really
matters. And what really matters is how to actually get customers and make
money.
You also see it in people who want to blog, podcast, or shoot videos for their
business but get hung up on which tools to use. The content is what matters. You
can spend tons on fancy equipment, but if you've got nothing to say ... well,
you've got nothing to say.
Use whatever you've got already or can afford cheaply. Then go. It's not the
gear that matters. It's playing what you've got as well as you can. Your tone is in
your fingers.

Sell your by-products
When you make something, you always make something else. You can't make
just one thing. Everything has a by-product. Observant and creative business
minds spot these by-products and see opportunities.
The lumber industry sells what used to be waste--sawdust, chips, and
shredded wood--for a pretty profit. You'll find these by-products in synthetic
fireplace logs, concrete, ice strengtheners, mulch, particleboard, fuel, and more.
But you're probably not manufacturing anything. That can make it tough to
spot your by-products. People at a lumber company see their waste. They can't
ignore sawdust. But you don't see yours. Maybe you don't even think you
produce any by-products. But that's myopic.
Our last book, Getting Real, was a by-product. We wrote that book without
even knowing it. The experience that came from building a company and
building software was the waste from actually doing the work. We swept up that
knowledge first into blog posts, then into a workshop series, then into a .pdf, and
then into a paperback. That by-product has made 37signals more than $1 million
directly and probably more than another $1 million indirectly. The book you're
reading right now is a by-product too.
The rock band Wilco found a valuable by-product in its recording process.
The band filmed the creation of an album and released it as a documentary called
I Am Trying to Break Your Heart. It offered an uncensored and fascinating look
at the group's creative process and infighting. The band made money off the
movie and also used it as a stepping-stone toward reaching a wider audience.
Henry Ford learned of a process for turning wood scraps from the production
of Model T's into charcoal briquets. He built a charcoal plant and Ford Charcoal
was created (later renamed Kingsford Charcoal). Today, Kingsford is still the
leading manufacturer of charcoal in America.
*
Software companies don't usually think about writing books. Bands don't
usually think about filming the recording process. Car manufacturers don't
usually think about selling charcoal. There's probably something you haven't
thought about that you could sell too.

Launch now
When is your product or service finished? When should you put it out on the
market? When is it safe to let people have it? Probably a lot sooner than you're
comfortable with. Once your product does what it needs to do, get it out there.
Just because you've still got a list of things to do doesn't mean it's not done.
Don't hold everything else up because of a few leftovers. You can do them later.
And doing them later may mean doing them better, too.
Think about it this way: If you had to launch your business in two weeks,
what would you cut out? Funny how a question like that forces you to focus. You
suddenly realize there's a lot of stuff you don't need. And what you do need
seems obvious. When you impose a deadline, you gain clarity. It's the best way
to get to that gut instinct that tells you, "We don't need this."
Put off anything you don't need for launch. Build the necessities now, worry
about the luxuries later. If you really think about it, there's a whole lot you don't
need on day one.
When we launched Basecamp, we didn't even have the ability to bill
customers! Because the product billed in monthly cycles, we knew we had a
thirty-day gap to figure it out. So we used the time before launch to solve more
urgent problems that actually mattered on day one. Day 30 could wait.
Camper, a brand of shoes, opened a store in San Francisco before construction
was even finished and called it a Walk in Progress. Customers could draw on the
walls of the empty store. Camper displayed shoes on cheap plywood laid over
dozens of shoe boxes. The most popular message written by customers on the
walls: "Keep the store just the way it is."
*
Likewise, the founders of Crate and Barrel didn't wait to build fancy displays
when they opened their first store. They turned over the crates and barrels that
the merchandise came in and stacked products on top of them.+
Don't mistake this approach for skimping on quality, either. You still want to
make something great. This approach just recognizes that the best way to get
there is through iterations. Stop imagining what's going to work. Find out for
real.
*Walt Stanchfield, Drawn to Life: 20 Golden Years of Disney Master Classes,
vol. 1, The Walt Stanchfield Lectures, Oxford, UK: Focal Press, 2009.
*Pasolivo Olive Oil, Zingerman's, www.zingermans.com/product.aspx?
productid=o-psl
*"About Kingsford: Simply a Matter of Taste," Kingsford,
www.kingsford.com/about/index.htm
*Fara Warner, "Walk in Progress," Fast Company, Dec. 19, 2007,
www.fastcompany.com/magazine/58/lookfeel.html
+Matt Valley, "The Crate and Barrel Story," Retail Traffic, June 1, 2001,
retailtrafficmag.com/mag/retail_crate_barrel_story
CHAPTER
PRODUCTIVITY
Illusions of agreement
The business world is littered with dead documents that do nothing but waste
people's time. Reports no one reads, diagrams no one looks at, and specs that
never resemble the finished product. These things take forever to make but only
seconds to forget.
If you need to explain something, try getting real with it. Instead of describing
what something looks like, draw it. Instead of explaining what something sounds
like, hum it. Do everything you can to remove layers of abstraction.
The problem with abstractions (like reports and documents) is that they create
illusions of agreement. A hundred people can read the same words, but in their
heads, they're imagining a hundred different things.
That's why you want to get to something real right away. That's when you get
true understanding. It's like when we read about characters in a book--we each
picture them differently in our heads. But when we actually see people, we all
know exactly what they look like.
When the team at Alaska Airlines wanted to build a new Airport of the Future,
they didn't rely on blueprints and sketches. They got a warehouse and built
mock-ups using cardboard boxes for podiums, kiosks, and belts. The team then
built a small prototype in Anchorage to test systems with real passengers and
employees. The design that resulted from this getting-real process has
significantly reduced wait times and increased agent productivity.
*
Widely admired furniture craftsman Sam Maloof felt it was impossible to
make a working drawing to show all the intricate and fine details that go into a
chair or stool. "Many times I do not know how a certain area is to be done until I
start working with a chisel, rasp, or whatever tool is needed for that particular
job," he said.
+
That's the path we all should take. Get the chisel out and start making
something real. Anything else is just a distraction.

Reasons to quit
It's easy to put your head down and just work on what you think needs to be
done. It's a lot harder to pull your head up and ask why. Here are some important
questions to ask yourself to ensure you're doing work that matters:
Why are you doing this? Ever find yourself working on something without
knowing exactly why? Someone just told you to do it. It's pretty common,
actually. That's why it's important to ask why you'reworking on______. What
is this for? Who benefits? What's the motivation behind it? Knowing the
answers to these questions will help you better understand the work itself.
What problem are you solving? What's the problem? Are customers
confused? Are you confused? Is something not clear enough? Was something
not possible before that should be possible now? Sometimes when you ask
these questions, you'll find you're solving an imaginary problem. That's when
it's time to stop and reevaluate what the hell you're doing.
Is this actually useful? Are you making something useful or just making
something? It's easy to confuse enthusiasm with usefulness. Sometimes it's
fine to play a bit and build something cool. But eventually you've got to stop
and ask yourself if it's useful, too. Cool wears off. Useful never does.
Are you adding value? Adding something is easy; adding value is hard. Is
this thing you're working on actually making your product more valuable for
customers? Can they get more out of it than they did before? Sometimes
things you think are adding value actually subtract from it. Too much ketchup
can ruin the fries. Value is about balance.
Will this change behavior? Is what you're working on really going to
change anything? Don't add something unless it has a real impact on how
people use your product.
Is there an easier way? Whenever you're working on something, ask, "Is
there an easier way?" You'll often find this easy way is more than good
enough for now. Problems are usually pretty simple. We just imagine that
they require hard solutions.
What could you be doing instead? What can't you do because you're doing
this? This is especially important for small teams with constrained resources.
That's when prioritization is even more important. If you work on A, can you
still do B and C before April? If not, would you rather have B and C instead
of A? If you're stuck on something for a long period of time, that means there
are other things you're not getting done.
Is it really worth it? Is what you're doing really worth it? Is this meeting
worth pulling six people off their work for an hour? Is it worth pulling an allnighter tonight, or could you just finish it up tomorrow? Is it worth getting all
stressed out over a press release from a competitor? Is it worth spending your
money on advertising? Determine the real value of what you're about to do
before taking the plunge.
Keep asking yourself (and others) the questions listed above. You don't need
to make it a formal process, but don't let it slide, either.
Also, don't be timid about your conclusions. Sometimes abandoning what
you're working on is the right move, even if you've already put in a lot of effort.
Don't throw good time after bad work.

Interruption is the enemy
of productivity
If you're constantly staying late and working weekends, it's not because there's
too much work to be done. It's because you're not getting enough done at work.
And the reason is interruptions.
Think about it: When do you get most of your work done? If you're like most
people, it's at night or early in the morning. It's no coincidence that these are the
times when nobody else is around.
At 2 p.m., people are usually in a meeting or answering e-mail or chatting
with colleagues. Those taps on the shoulder and little impromptu get-togethers
may seem harmless, but they're actually corrosive to productivity. Interruption is
not collaboration, it's just interruption. And when you're interrupted, you're not
getting work done.
Interruptions break your workday into a series of work moments. Forty-five
minutes and then you have a call. Fifteen minutes and then you have lunch. An
hour later, you have an afternoon meeting. Before you know it, it's five o'clock,
and you've only had a couple uninterrupted hours to get your work done. You
can't get meaningful things done when you're constantly going start, stop, start,
stop.
Instead, you should get in the alone zone. Long stretches of alone time are
when you're most productive. When you don't have to mind-shift between
various tasks, you get a boatload done. (Ever notice how much work you get
done on a plane since you're offline and there are zero outside distractions?)
Getting into that zone takes time and requires avoiding interruptions. It's like
REM sleep: You don't just go directly into REM sleep. You go to sleep first and
then make your way to REM. Any interruptions force you to start over. And just
as REM is when the real sleep magic happens, the alone zone is where the real
productivity magic happens.
Your alone zone doesn't have to be in the wee hours, though. You can set up a
rule at work that half the day is set aside for alone time. Decree that from 10 a.m.
to 2 p.m., people can't talk to each other (except during lunch). Or make the first
or last half of the day your alone-time period. Or instead of casual Fridays, try
no-talk Thursdays. Just make sure this period is unbroken in order to avoid
productivity-zapping interruptions.
And go all the way with it. A successful alone-time period means letting go of
communication addiction. During alone time, give up instant messages, phone
calls, e-mail, and meetings. Just shut up and get to work. You'll be surprised how
much more you get done.
Also, when you do collaborate, try to use passive communication tools, like email, that don't require an instant reply, instead of interruptive ones, like phone
calls and face-to-face meetings. That way people can respond when it's
convenient for them, instead of being forced to drop everything right away.
Your day is under siege by interruptions. It's on you to fight back.

Meetings are toxic
The worst interruptions of all are meetings. Here's why:
They're usually about words and abstract concepts, not real things.
They usually convey an abysmally small amount of information per minute.
They drift off-subject easier than a Chicago cab in a snowstorm.
They require thorough preparation that most people don't have time for.
They frequently have agendas so vague that nobody is really sure of the
goal.
They often include at least one moron who inevitably gets his turn to waste
everyone's time with nonsense.
Meetings procreate. One meeting leads to another meeting leads to another
...
It's also unfortunate that meetings are typically scheduled like TV shows. You
set aside thirty minutes or an hour because that's how scheduling software works
(you'll never see anyone schedule a seven-minute meeting with Outlook). Too
bad. If it only takes seven minutes to accomplish a meeting's goal, then that's all
the time you should spend. Don't stretch seven into thirty.
When you think about it, the true cost of meetings is staggering. Let's say
you're going to schedule a meeting that lasts one hour, and you invite ten people
to attend. That's actually a ten-hour meeting, not a one-hour meeting. You're
trading ten hours of productivity for one hour of meeting time. And it's probably
more like fifteen hours, because there are mental switching costs that come with
stopping what you're doing, going somewhere else to meet, and then resuming
what you were doing beforehand.
Is it ever OK to trade ten or fifteen hours of productivity for one hour of
meeting? Sometimes, maybe. But that's a pretty hefty price to pay. Judged on a
pure cost basis, meetings of this size quickly become liabilities, not assets. Think
about the time you're actually losing and ask yourself if it's really worth it.
If you decide you absolutely must get together, try to make your meeting a
productive one by sticking to these simple rules:
Set a timer. When it rings, meeting's over. Period.
Invite as few people as possible.
Always have a clear agenda.
Begin with a specific problem.
Meet at the site of the problem instead of a conference room. Point to real
things and suggest real changes.
End with a solution and make someone responsible for implementing it.

Good enough is fine
A lot of people get off on solving problems with complicated solutions. Flexing
your intellectual muscles can be intoxicating. Then you start looking for another
big challenge that gives you that same rush, regardless of whether it's a good
idea or not.
A better idea: Find a judo solution, one that delivers maximum efficiency with
minimum effort. Judo solutions are all about getting the most out of doing the
least. Whenever you face an obstacle, look for a way to judo it.
Part of this is recognizing that problems are negotiable. Let's say your
challenge is to get a bird's-eye view. One way to do it is to climb Mount Everest.
That's the ambitious solution. But then again, you could take an elevator to the
top of a tall building. That's a judo solution.
Problems can usually be solved with simple, mundane solutions. That means
there's no glamorous work. You don't get to show off your amazing skills. You
just build something that gets the job done and then move on. This approach
may not earn you oohs and aahs, but it lets you get on with it.
Look at political campaign ads. A big issue pops up, and politicians have an
ad about it on the air the next day. The production quality is low. They use
photos instead of live footage. They have static, plain-text headlines instead of
fancy animated graphics. The only audio is a voice-over done by an unseen
narrator. Despite all that, the ad is still good enough. If they waited weeks to
perfect it, it would come out too late. It's a situation where timeliness is more
important than polish or even quality.
When good enough gets the job done, go for it. It's way better than wasting
resources or, even worse, doing nothing because you can't afford the complex
solution. And remember, you can usually turn good enough into great later.

Quick wins
Momentum fuels motivation. It keeps you going. It drives you. Without it, you
can't go anywhere. If you aren't motivated by what you're working on, it won't be
very good.
The way you build momentum is by getting something done and then moving
on to the next thing. No one likes to be stuck on an endless project with no finish
line in sight. Being in the trenches for nine months and not having anything to
show for it is a real buzzkill. Eventually it just burns you out. To keep your
momentum and motivation up, get in the habit of accomplishing small victories
along the way. Even a tiny improvement can give you a good jolt of momentum.
The longer something takes, the less likely it is that you're going to finish it.
Excitement comes from doing something and then letting customers have at it.
Planning a menu for a year is boring. Getting the new menu out, serving the
food, and getting feedback is exciting. So don't wait too long--you'll smother
your sparks if you do.
If you absolutely have to work on long-term projects, try to dedicate one day a
week (or every two weeks) to small victories that generate enthusiasm. Small
victories let you celebrate and release good news. And you want a steady stream
of good news. When there's something new to announce every two weeks, you
energize your team and give your customers something to be excited about.
So ask yourself, "What can we do in two weeks?" And then do it. Get it out
there and let people use it, taste it, play it, or whatever. The quicker it's in the
hands of customers, the better off you'll be.

Don't be a hero
A lot of times it's better to be a quitter than a hero.
For example, let's say you think a task can be done in two hours. But four
hours into it, you're still only a quarter of the way done. The natural instinct is to
think, "But I can't give up now, I've already spent four hours on this!"
So you go into hero mode. You're determined to make it work (and slightly
embarrassed that it isn't already working). You grab your cape and shut yourself
off from the world.
And sometimes that kind of sheer effort overload works. But is it worth it?
Probably not. The task was worth it when you thought it would cost two hours,
not sixteen. In those sixteen hours, you could have gotten a bunch of other things
done. Plus, you cut yourself off from feedback, which can lead you even further
down the wrong path. Even heroes need a fresh pair of eyes sometimes--
someone else to give them a reality check.
We've experienced this problem firsthand. So we decided that if anything
takes one of us longer than two weeks, we've got to bring other people in to take
a look. They might not do any work on the task, but at least they can review it
quickly and give their two cents. Sometimes an obvious solution is staring you
right in the face, but you can't even see it.
Keep in mind that the obvious solution might very well be quitting. People
automatically associate quitting with failure, but sometimes that's exactly what
you should do. If you already spent too much time on something that wasn't
worth it, walk away. You can't get that time back. The worst thing you can do
now is waste even more time.

Go to sleep
Forgoing sleep is a bad idea. Sure, you get those extra hours right now, but you
pay in spades later: You destroy your creativity, morale, and attitude.
Once in a while, you can pull an all-nighter if you fully understand the
consequences. Just don't make it a habit. If it becomes a constant, the costs start
to mount:
Stubbornness: When you're really tired, it always seems easier to plow down
whatever bad path you happen to be on instead of reconsidering the route.
The finish line is a constant mirage and you wind up walking in the desert
way too long.
Lack of creativity: Creativity is one of the first things to go when you lose
sleep. What distinguishes people who are ten times more effective than the
norm is not that they work ten times as hard; it's that they use their creativity
to come up with solutions that require one-tenth of the effort. Without sleep,
you stop coming up with those one-tenth solutions.
Diminished morale: When your brain isn't firing on all cylinders, it loves to
feed on less demanding tasks. Like reading yet another article about stuff that
doesn't matter. When you're tired, you lose motivation to attack the big
problems.
Irritability: Your ability to remain patient and tolerant is severely reduced
when you're tired. If you encounter someone who's acting like a fool, there's a
good chance that person is suffering from sleep deprivation.
These are just some of the costs you incur when not getting enough sleep. Yet
some people still develop a masochistic sense of honor about sleep deprivation.
They even brag about how tired they are. Don't be impressed. It'll come back to
bite them in the ass.

Your estimates suck
We're all terrible estimators. We think we can guess how long something will
take, when we really have no idea. We see everything going according to a bestcase scenario, without the delays that inevitably pop up. Reality never sticks to
best-case scenarios.
That's why estimates that stretch weeks, months, and years into the future are
fantasies. The truth is you just don't know what's going to happen that far in
advance.
How often do you think a quick trip to the grocery store will take only a few
minutes and then it winds up taking an hour? And remember when cleaning out
the attic took you all day instead of just the couple of hours you thought it
would? Or sometimes it's the opposite, like that time you planned on spending
four hours raking the yard only to have it take just thirty-five minutes. We
humans are just plain bad at estimating.
Even with these simple tasks, our estimates are often off by a factor of two or
more. If we can't be accurate when estimating a few hours, how can we expect to
accurately predict the length of a "six-month project"?
Plus, we're not just a little bit wrong when we guess how long something will
take--we're a lot wrong. That means if you're guessing six months, you might be
way off: We're not talking seven months instead of six, we're talking one year
instead of six months.
That's why Boston's "Big Dig" highway project finished five years late and
billions over budget. Or the Denver International Airport opened sixteen months
late, at a cost overrun of $2 billion.
The solution: Break the big thing into smaller things. The smaller it is, the
easier it is to estimate. You're probably still going to get it wrong, but you'll be a
lot less wrong than if you estimated a big project. If something takes twice as
long as you expected, better to have it be a small project that's a couple weeks
over rather than a long one that's a couple months over.
Keep breaking your time frames down into smaller chunks. Instead of one
twelve-week project, structure it as twelve one-week projects. Instead of
guesstimating at tasks that take thirty hours or more, break them down into more
realistic six-to-ten-hour chunks. Then go one step at a time.

Long lists don't get done
Start making smaller to-do lists too. Long lists collect dust. When's the last time
you finished a long list of things? You might have knocked off the first few, but
chances are you eventually abandoned it (or blindly checked off items that
weren't really done properly).
Long lists are guilt trips. The longer the list of unfinished items, the worse you
feel about it. And at a certain point, you just stop looking at it because it makes
you feel bad. Then you stress out and the whole thing turns into a big mess.
There's a better way. Break that long list down into a bunch of smaller lists.
For example, break a single list of a hundred items into ten lists of ten items.
That means when you finish an item on a list, you've completed 10 percent of
that list, instead of 1 percent.
Yes, you still have the same amount of stuff left to do. But now you can look
at the small picture and find satisfaction, motivation, and progress. That's a lot
better than staring at the huge picture and being terrified and demoralized.
Whenever you can, divide problems into smaller and smaller pieces until
you're able to deal with them completely and quickly. Simply rearranging your
tasks this way can have an amazing impact on your productivity and motivation.
And a quick suggestion about prioritization: Don't prioritize with numbers or
labels. Avoid saying, "This is high priority, this is low priority." Likewise, don't
say, "This is a three, this is a two, this is a one, this is a three," etc. Do that and
you'll almost always end up with a ton of really high-priority things. That's not
really prioritizing.
Instead, prioritize visually. Put the most important thing at the top. When
you're done with that, the next thing on the list becomes the next most important
thing. That way you'll only have a single next most important thing to do at a
time. And that's enough.

Make tiny decisions
Big decisions are hard to make and hard to change. And once you make one, the
tendency is to continue believing you made the right decision, even if you didn't.
You stop being objective.
Once ego and pride are on the line, you can't change your mind without
looking bad. The desire to save face trumps the desire to make the right call.
And then there's inertia too: The more steam you put into going in one direction,
the harder it is to change course.
Instead, make choices that are small enough that they're effectively temporary.
When you make tiny decisions, you can't make big mistakes. These small
decisions mean you can afford to change. There's no big penalty if you mess up.
You just fix it.
Making tiny decisions doesn't mean you can't make big plans or think big
ideas. It just means you believe the best way to achieve those big things is one
tiny decision at a time.
Polar explorer Ben Saunders said that during his solo North Pole expedition
(thirty-one marathons back-to-back, seventy-two days alone) the "huge decision"
was often so horrifically overwhelming to contemplate that his day-to-day
decision making rarely extended beyond "getting to that bit of ice a few yards in
front of me."
Attainable goals like that are the best ones to have. Ones you can actually
accomplish and build on. You get to say, "We nailed it. Done!" Then you get
going on the next one. That's a lot more satisfying than some pie-in-the-sky
fantasy goal you never meet.
*Dave Demerjian, "Hustle & Flow," Fast Company,
www.fastcompany.com/magazine/123/hustle-and-flow.html
+"Maloof on Maloof: Quotations and Works of Sam Maloof," Smithsonian
American Art Museum,
americanart.si.edu/exhibitions/online/maloof/introduction
CHAPTER
COMPETITORS
Don't copy
Sometimes copying can be part of the learning process, like when you see an art
student replicating a painting in a museum or a drummer playing along to John
Bonham's solo on Led Zeppelin's "Moby Dick." When you're a student, this sort
of imitation can be a helpful tool on the path to discovering your own voice.
Unfortunately, copying in the business arena is usually more nefarious. Maybe
it's because of the copy-and-paste world we live in these days. You can steal
someone's words, images, or code instantly. And that means it's tempting to try
to build a business by being a copycat.
That's a formula for failure, though. The problem with this sort of copying is it
skips understanding--and understanding is how you grow. You have to
understand why something works or why something is the way it is. When you
just copy and paste, you miss that. You just repurpose the last layer instead of
understanding all the layers underneath.
So much of the work an original creator puts into something is invisible. It's
buried beneath the surface. The copycat doesn't really know why something
looks the way it looks or feels the way it feels or reads the way it reads. The
copy is a faux finish. It delivers no substance, no understanding, and nothing to
base future decisions on.
Plus, if you're a copycat, you can never keep up. You're always in a passive
position. You never lead; you always follow. You give birth to something that's
already behind the times--just a knockoff, an inferior version of the original.
That's no way to live.
How do you know if you're copying someone? If someone else is doing the
bulk of the work, you're copying. Be influenced, but don't steal.

Decommoditize your product
If you're successful, people will try to copy what you do. It's just a fact of life.
But there's a great way to protect yourself from copycats: Make you part of your
product or service. Inject what's unique about the way you think into what you
sell. Decommoditize your product. Make it something no one else can offer.
Look at Zappos.com, a billion-dollar online shoe retailer. A pair of sneakers
from Zappos is the same as a pair from Foot Locker or any other retailer. But
Zappos sets itself apart by injecting CEO Tony Hsieh's obsession with customer
service into everything it does.
At Zappos, customer-service employees don't use scripts and are allowed to
talk at length with customers. The call center and the company's headquarters are
in the same place, not oceans apart. And all Zappos employees--even those who
don't work in customer service or fulfillment--start out by spending four weeks
answering phones and working in the warehouse. It's this devotion to customer
service that makes Zappos unique among shoe sellers.
*
Another example is Polyface, an environmentally friendly Virginia farm
owned by Joel Salatin. Salatin has a strong set of beliefs and runs his business
accordingly. Polyface sells the idea that it does things a bigger agribusiness can't
do. Even though it's more expensive to do so, it feeds cows grass instead of corn
and never gives them antibiotics. It never ships food. Anyone is welcome to visit
the farm anytime and go anywhere (try that at a typical meat-processing plant).
Polyface doesn't just sell chickens, it sells a way of thinking. And customers love
Polyface for it. Some customers routinely drive from 150 miles away to get
"clean" meat for their families.
*
Pour yourself into your product and everything around your product too: how
you sell it, how you support it, how you explain it, and how you deliver it.
Competitors can never copy the you in your product.

Pick a fight
If you think a competitor sucks, say so. When you do that, you'll find that others
who agree with you will rally to your side. Being the anti-______ is a great way
to differentiate yourself and attract followers.
For example, Dunkin' Donuts likes to position itself as the anti-Starbucks. Its
ads mock Starbucks for using "Fritalian" terms instead of small, medium, and
large. Another Dunkin' campaign is centered on a taste test in which it beat
Starbucks. There's even a site called DunkinBeatStarbucks.com where visitors
can send e-cards with statements like "Friends don't let friends drink Starbucks."
Audi is another example. It's been taking on the old guard of car
manufacturers. It puts "old luxury" brands like Rolls-Royce and Mercedes "on
notice" in ads touting Audi as the fresh luxury alternative. Audi takes on Lexus's
automatic parking systems with ads that say Audi drivers know how to park their
own cars. Another ad gives a side-by-side comparison of BMW and Audi
owners: The BMW owner uses the rearview mirror to adjust his hair while the
Audi driver uses the mirror to see what's behind him.
Apple jabs at Microsoft with ads that compare Mac and PC owners, and 7UP
bills itself as the Uncola. Under Armour positions itself as Nike for a new
generation.
All these examples show the power and direction you can gain by having a
target in your sights. Who do you want to take a shot at?
You can even pit yourself as the opponent of an entire industry. Dyson's
Airblade starts with the premise that the hand-dryer industry is a failure and then
sells itself as faster and more hygienic than the others. I Can't Believe It's Not
Butter puts its enemy right there in its product name.
Having an enemy gives you a great story to tell customers, too. Taking a stand
always stands out. People get stoked by conflict. They take sides. Passions are
ignited. And that's a good way to get people to take notice.

Underdo your competition
Conventional wisdom says that to beat your competitors, you need to one-up
them. If they have four features, you need five (or fifteen, or twenty-five). If
they're spending $20,000, you need to spend $30,000. If they have fifty
employees, you need a hundred.
This sort of one-upping, Cold War mentality is a dead end. When you get
suckered into an arms race, you wind up in a never-ending battle that costs you
massive amounts of money, time, and drive. And it forces you to constantly be
on the defensive, too. Defensive companies can't think ahead; they can only
think behind. They don't lead; they follow.
So what do you do instead? Do less than your competitors to beat them. Solve
the simple problems and leave the hairy, difficult, nasty problems to the
competition. Instead of one-upping, try one-downing. Instead of outdoing, try
underdoing.
The bicycle world provides a great example. For years, major bicycle brands
focused on the latest in hightech equipment: mountain bikes with suspension and
ultrastrong disc brakes, or lightweight titanium road bikes with carbon-fiber
everything. And it was assumed that bikes should have multiple gears: three, ten,
or twenty-one.
But recently, fixed-gear bicycles have boomed in popularity, despite being as
low-tech as you can get. These bikes have just one gear. Some models don't have
brakes. The advantage: They're simpler, lighter, cheaper, and don't require as
much maintenance.
Another great example of a product that is succeeding by underdoing the
competition: the Flip--an ultrasimple, point-and-shoot, compact camcorder that's
taken a significant percentage of the market in a short time. Look at all the things
the Flip does not deliver:
No big screen (and the tiny screen doesn't swing out for self-portraits either)
No photo-taking ability
No tapes or discs (you have to offload the videos to a computer)
No menus
No settings
No video light
No viewfinder
No special effects
No headphone jack
No lens cap
No memory card
No optical zoom
The Flip wins fans because it only does a few simple things and it does them
well. It's easy and fun to use. It goes places a bigger camera would never go and
gets used by people who would never use a fancier camera.
Don't shy away from the fact that your product or service does less. Highlight
it. Be proud of it. Sell it as aggressively as competitors sell their extensive
feature lists.
Who cares what they're doing?
In the end, it's not worth paying much attention to the competition anyway. Why
not? Because worrying about the competition quickly turns into an obsession.
What are they doing right now? Where are they going next? How should we
react?
Every little move becomes something to be analyzed. And that's a terrible
mind-set. It leads to overwhelming stress and anxiety. That state of mind is bad
soil for growing anything.
It's a pointless exercise anyway. The competitive landscape changes all the
time. Your competitor tomorrow may be completely different from your
competitor today. It's out of your control. What's the point of worrying about
things you can't control?
Focus on yourself instead. What's going on in here is way more important than
what's going on out there. When you spend time worrying about someone else,
you can't spend that time improving yourself.
Focus on competitors too much and you wind up diluting your own vision.
Your chances of coming up with something fresh go way down when you keep
feeding your brain other people's ideas. You become reactionary instead of
visionary. You wind up offering your competitor's products with a different coat
of paint.
If you're planning to build "the iPod killer" or "the next Pokemon," you're
already dead. You're allowing the competition to set the parameters. You're not
going to out-Apple Apple. They're defining the rules of the game. And you can't
beat someone who's making the rules. You need to redefine the rules, not just
build something slightly better.
Don't ask yourself whether you're "beating" Apple (or whoever the big boy is
in your industry). That's the wrong question to ask. It's not a win-or-lose battle.
Their profits and costs are theirs. Yours are yours.
If you're just going to be like everyone else, why are you even doing this? If
you merely replicate competitors, there's no point to your existence. Even if you
wind up losing, it's better to go down fighting for what you believe in instead of
just imitating others.
*"A Shine on Their Shoes," Business Week, Dec. 5, 2005,
www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/05_49/b3962118.htm
*"The Polyface Story," www.polyfacefarms.com/story.aspx
CHAPTER
EVOLUTION

Say no by default
If I'd listened to customers,
I'd have given them a faster horse.
--HENRY FORD
It's so easy to say yes. Yes to another feature, yes to an overly optimistic
deadline, yes to a mediocre design. Soon, the stack of things you've said yes to
grows so tall you can't even see the things you should really be doing.
Start getting into the habit of saying no--even to many of your best ideas. Use
the power of no to get your priorities straight. You rarely regret saying no. But
you often wind up regretting saying yes.
People avoid saying no because confrontation makes them uncomfortable. But
the alternative is even worse. You drag things out, make things complicated, and
work on ideas you don't believe in.
It's like a relationship: Breaking one up is hard to do, but staying in it just
because you're too chicken to drop the ax is even worse. Deal with the brief
discomfort of confrontation up front and avoid the long-term regret.
Don't believe that "customer is always right" stuff, either. Let's say you're a
chef. If enough of your customers say your food is too salty or too hot, you
change it. But if a few persnickety patrons tell you to add bananas to your
lasagna, you're going to turn them down, and that's OK. Making a few vocal
customers happy isn't worth it if it ruins the product for everyone else.
ING Direct has built the fastest-growing bank in America by saying no. When
customers ask for a credit card, the answer is no. When they ask for an online
brokerage, the answer is no. When they ask if they can open an account with a
million dollars in it, the answer is no (the bank has a strict deposit maximum).
ING wants to keep things simple. That's why the bank offers just a few savings
accounts, certificates of deposit, and mutual funds--and that's it.
Don't be a jerk about saying no, though. Just be honest. If you're not willing to
yield to a customer request, be polite and explain why. People are surprisingly
understanding when you take the time to explain your point of view. You may
even win them over to your way of thinking. If not, recommend a competitor if
you think there's a better solution out there. It's better to have people be happy
using someone else's product than disgruntled using yours.
Your goal is to make sure your product stays right for you. You're the one who
h
a
s
t
o
b
e
l
i
e
v
e
i
n
i
t
m
o
s
t. T
h
a
t
w
a
y,
y
o
u
c
a
n
s
a
y,
"
I
t
h
i
n
k
y
o
u'l
l
l
o
v
e
i
t
b
e
c
a
u
s
e
I
l
o
v
e
i
t."
Let your customers outgrow you
Maybe you've seen this scenario: There's a customer that's paying a company a
lot of money. The company tries to please that customer in any way possible. It
tweaks and changes the product per this one customer's requests and starts to
alienate its general customer base.
Then one day that big customer winds up leaving and the company is left
holding the bag--and the bag is a product that's ideally suited to someone who's
not there anymore. And now it's a bad fit for everyone else.
When you stick with your current customers come hell or high water, you
wind up cutting yourself off from new ones. Your product or service becomes so
tailored to your current customers that it stops appealing to fresh blood. And
that's how your company starts to die.
After our first product had been around for a while, we started getting some
heat from folks who had been with us from the beginning. They said they were
starting to grow out of the application. Their businesses were changing and they
wanted us to change our product to mirror their newfound complexity and
requirements.
We said no. Here's why: We'd rather our customers grow out of our products
eventually than never be able to grow into them in the first place. Adding poweruser features to satisfy some can intimidate those who aren't on board yet.
Scaring away new customers is worse than losing old customers.
When you let customers outgrow you, you'll most likely wind up with a
product that's basic--and that's fine. Small, simple, basic needs are constant.
There's an endless supply of customers who need exactly that.
And there are always more people who are not using your product than people
who are. Make sure you make it easy for these people to get on board. That's
where your continued growth potential lies.
People and situations change. You can't be everything to everyone. Companies
need to be true to a type of customer more than a specific individual customer
with changing needs.

Don't confuse enthusiasm with priority
Coming up with a great idea gives you a rush. You start imagining the
possibilities and the benefits. And of course, you want all that right away. So you
drop everything else you're working on and begin pursuing your latest, greatest
idea.
Bad move. The enthusiasm you have for a new idea is not an accurate
indicator of its true worth. What seems like a sure-fire hit right now often gets
downgraded to just a "nice to have" by morning. And "nice to have" isn't worth
putting everything else on hold.
We have ideas for new features all the time. On top of that, we get dozens of
interesting ideas from customers every day too. Sure, it'd be fun to immediately
chase all these ideas to see where they lead. But if we did that, we'd just wind up
running on a treadmill and never get anywhere.
So let your latest grand ideas cool off for a while first. By all means, have as
many great ideas as you can. Get excited about them. Just don't act in the heat of
the moment. Write them down and park them for a few days. Then, evaluate
their actual priority with a calm mind.

Be at-home good
You know what it feels like. You go to a store. You're comparing a few different
products, and you're sold on the one that sounds like it's the best deal. It's got the
most features. It looks the coolest. The packaging looks hot. There's sensational
copy on the box. Everything seems great.
But then you get it home, and it doesn't deliver. It's not as easy to use as you
thought it'd be. It has too many features you don't need. You end up feeling that
you've been taken. You didn't really get what you needed and you realize you
spent too much.
You just bought an in-store-good product. That's a product you're more
excited about in the store than you are after you've actually used it.
Smart companies make the opposite: something that's at-home good. When
you get the product home, you're actually more impressed with it than you were
at the store. You live with it and grow to like it more and more. And you tell
your friends, too.
When you create an at-home-good product, you may have to sacrifice a bit of
in-store sizzle. A product that executes on the basics beautifully may not seem as
sexy as competitors loaded with bells and whistles. Being great at a few things
often doesn't look all that flashy from afar. That's OK. You're aiming for a longterm relationship, not a one-night stand.
This is as true for advertising as it is for in-store packaging or displays. We've
all seen a TV ad for some "revolutionary" gadget that will change your life. But
when the actual product arrives in the mail, it turns out to be a disappointment.
In-media good isn't nearly as important as at-home good. You can't paint over a
bad experience with good advertising or marketing.

Don't write it down
How should you keep track of what customers want? Don't. Listen, but then
forget what people said. Seriously.
There's no need for a spreadsheet, database, or filing system. The requests that
really matter are the ones you'll hear over and over. After a while, you won't be
able to forget them. Your customers will be your memory. They'll keep
reminding you. They'll show you which things you truly need to worry about.
If there's a request that you keep forgetting, that's a sign that it isn't very
important. The really important stuff doesn't go away.
CHAPTER
PROMOTION
Welcome obscurity
No one knows who you are right now. And that's just fine. Being obscure is a
great position to be in. Be happy you're in the shadows.
Use this time to make mistakes without the whole world hearing about them.
Keep tweaking. Work out the kinks. Test random ideas. Try new things. No one
knows you, so it's no big deal if you mess up. Obscurity helps protect your ego
and preserve your confidence.
Retailers experiment with test markets all the time for this reason. When
Dunkin' Donuts thought about selling pizza, hot dogs, and other hot sandwiches,
it test-marketed the products at just ten select locations.
Broadway shows also provide a great example of testing ideas on a small
stage first. They routinely do a trial run in a smaller city before coming to New
York. Testing out of town lets actors get some reps in front of a live audience
before the show goes up in front of harsher critics and tastemakers.
Would you want the whole world to watch you the first time you do anything?
If you've never given a speech before, do you want your first speech to be in
front of ten thousand people or ten people? You don't want everyone to watch
you starting your business. It makes no sense to tell everyone to look at you if
you're not ready to be looked at yet.
And keep in mind that once you do get bigger and more popular, you're
inevitably going to take fewer risks. When you're a success, the pressure to
maintain predictability and consistency builds. You get more conservative. It's
harder to take risks. That's when things start to fossilize and change becomes
difficult.
If millions of people are using your product, every change you make will have
a much bigger impact. Before, you might have upset a hundred people when you
changed something. Now you might upset thousands. You can reason with a
hundred people, but you need riot gear to deal with ten thousand angry
customers.
These early days of obscurity are something you'll miss later on, when you're
really under the microscope. Now's the time to take risks without worrying about
embarrassing yourself.

Build an audience
All companies have customers. Lucky companies have fans. But the most
fortunate companies have audiences. An audience can be your secret weapon.
A lot of businesses still spend big bucks to reach people. Every time they want
to say something, they dip into their budgets, pull out a huge wad of cash, and
place some ads. But this approach is both expensive and unreliable. As they say,
you waste half of your ad budget--you just don't know which half.
Today's smartest companies know better. Instead of going out to reach people,
you want people to come to you. An audience returns often--on its own--to see
what you have to say. This is the most receptive group of customers and
potential customers you'll ever have.
Over the past ten years, we've built an audience of more than a hundred
thousand daily readers for our Signal vs. Noise blog. Every day they come back
to see what we have to say. We may talk about design or business or software or
psychology or usability or our industry at large. Whatever it is, these people are
interested enough to come back to hear more. And if they like what we have to
say, they'll probably also like what we have to sell.
How much would it cost us to reach those hundred thousand people every day
the old-fashioned way? Hundreds of thousands? Millions? And how would we
have done it? Running ads? Buying radio spots? Sending direct mail?
When you build an audience, you don't have to buy people's attention--they
give it to you. This is a huge advantage.
So build an audience. Speak, write, blog, tweet, make videos--whatever. Share
information that's valuable and you'll slowly but surely build a loyal audience.
Then when you need to get the word out, the right people will already be
listening.

Out-teach your competition
You can advertise. You can hire salespeople. You can sponsor events. But your
competitors are doing the same things. How does that help you stand out?
Instead of trying to outspend, outsell, or outsponsor competitors, try to outteach them. Teaching probably isn't something your competitors are even
thinking about. Most businesses focus on selling or servicing, but teaching never
even occurs to them.
The Hoefler Type Foundry teaches designers about type at Typography.com.
Etsy, an online store for things handmade, holds entrepreneurial workshops that
explain "best practices" and promotional ideas to people who sell at the site.
Gary Vaynerchuk, who owns a large wine shop, teaches people about wine
online at Wine Library TV, and tens of thousands of people watch every day.
Teach and you'll form a bond you just don't get from traditional marketing
tactics. Buying people's attention with a magazine or online banner ad is one
thing. Earning their loyalty by teaching them forms a whole different connection.
They'll trust you more. They'll respect you more. Even if they don't use your
product, they can still be your fans.
Teaching is something individuals and small companies can do that bigger
competitors can't. Big companies can afford a Super Bowl ad; you can't. But you
can afford to teach, and that's something they'll never do, because big companies
are obsessed with secrecy. Everything at those places has to get filtered through
a lawyer and go through layers of red tape. Teaching is your chance to
outmaneuver them.

Emulate chefs
You've probably heard of Emeril Lagasse, Mario Batali, Bobby Flay, Julia Child,
Paula Deen, Rick Bayless, or Jacques Pepin. They're great chefs, but there are a
lot of great chefs out there. So why do you know these few better than others?
Because they share everything they know. They put their recipes in cookbooks
and show their techniques on cooking shows.
As a business owner, you should share everything you know too. This is
anathema to most in the business world. Businesses are usually paranoid and
secretive. They think they have proprietary this and competitive advantage that.
Maybe a rare few do, but most don't. And those that don't should stop acting like
those that do. Don't be afraid of sharing.
A recipe is much easier to copy than a business. Shouldn't that scare Mario
Batali? Why would he go on TV and show you how he does what he does? Why
would he put all his recipes in cookbooks where anyone can buy and replicate
them? Because he knows those recipes and techniques aren't enough to beat him
at his own game. No one's going to buy his cookbook, open a restaurant next
door, and put him out of business. It just doesn't work like that. Yet this is what
many in the business world think will happen if their competitors learn how they
do things. Get over it.
So emulate famous chefs. They cook, so they write cookbooks. What do you
do? What are your "recipes"? What's your "cookbook"? What can you tell the
world about how you operate that's informative, educational, and promotional?
This book is our cookbook. What's yours?

Go behind the scenes
Give people a backstage pass and show them how your business works. Imagine
that someone wanted to make a reality show about your business. What would
they share? Now stop waiting for someone else and do it yourself.
Think no one will care? Think again. Even seemingly boring jobs can be
fascinating when presented right. What could be more boring than commercial
fishing and trucking? Yet the Discovery Channel and History Channel have
turned these professions into highly rated shows: Deadliest Catch and Ice Road
Truckers.
It doesn't need to be a dangerous job, either. People love finding out the little
secrets of all kinds of businesses, even one that makes those tiny marshmallows
in breakfast cereals. That's why the Food Network's Unwrapped--which explores
the secrets behind lunch-box treats, soda pop, movie candy, and more--is such a
popular program.
People are curious about how things are made. It's why they like factory tours
or behind-the-scenes footage on DVDs. They want to see how the sets are built,
how the animation is done, how the director cast the film, etc. They want to
know how and why other people make decisions.
Letting people behind the curtain changes your relationship with them. They'll
feel a bond with you and see you as human beings instead of a faceless company.
They'll see the sweat and effort that goes into what you sell. They'll develop a
deeper level of understanding and appreciation for what you do.

Nobody likes plastic flowers
The business world is full of "professionals" who wear the uniform and try to
seem perfect. In truth, they just come off as stiff and boring. No one can relate to
people like that.
Don't be afraid to show your flaws. Imperfections are real and people respond
to real. It's why we like real flowers that wilt, not perfect plastic ones that never
change. Don't worry about how you're supposed to sound and how you're
supposed to act. Show the world what you're really like, warts and all.
There's a beauty to imperfection. This is the essence of the Japanese principle
of wabi-sabi. Wabi-sabi values character and uniqueness over a shiny facade. It
teaches that cracks and scratches in things should be embraced. It's also about
simplicity. You strip things down and then use what you have. Leonard Koren,
author of a book on wabi-sabi, gives this advice: Pare down to the essence, but
don't remove the poetry. Keep things clean and unencumbered but don't
sterilize.
*
It's a beautiful way to put it: Leave the poetry in what you make. When
something becomes too polished, it loses its soul. It seems robotic.
So talk like you really talk. Reveal things that others are unwilling to discuss.
Be upfront about your shortcomings. Show the latest version of what you're
working on, even if you're not done yet. It's OK if it's not perfect. You might not
seem as professional, but you will seem a lot more genuine.

Press releases are spam
What do you call a generic pitch sent out to hundreds of strangers hoping that
one will bite? Spam. That's what press releases are too: generic pitches for
coverage sent out to hundreds of journalists you don't know, hoping that one will
write about you.
Let's dissect the purpose of a press release for a moment: It's something you
send out because you want to be noticed. You want the press to pick up on your
new company, product, service, announcement, or whatever. You want them to
be excited enough to write a story about you.
But press releases are a terrible way to accomplish that. They're tired and
formulaic. There's nothing exciting about them. Journalists sift through dozens a
day. They wind up buried under an avalanche of hyperbolic headlines and fake
quotes from CEOs. Everything is labeled sensational, revolutionary,
groundbreaking, and amazing. It's numbing.
If you want to get someone's attention, it's silly to do exactly the same thing as
everyone else. You need to stand out. So why issue press releases like everyone
else does? Why spam journalists when their inbox is already filled with other
people's spam?
Furthermore, a press release is generic. You write it once and then send it to
tons of reporters--people whom you don't know and who don't know you. And
your first introduction is this vague, generic note you also send to everyone else?
Is that the impression you want to make? Is that really going to get you the
story?
Instead, call someone. Write a personal note. If you read a story about a
similar company or product, contact the journalist who wrote it. Pitch her with
some passion, some interest, some life. Do something meaningful. Be
remarkable. Stand out. Be unforgettable. That's how you'll get the best coverage.

Forget about the Wall Street Journal
Forget about Time, Forbes, Newsweek, Business Week, the New York Times, and
the Wall Street Journal. Pitching a reporter at one of these places is practically
impossible. Good luck even getting ahold of that guy. And even if you do, he
probably won't care anyway. You're not big enough to matter.
You're better off focusing on getting your story into a trade publication or
picked up by a niche blogger. With these outlets, the barrier is much lower. You
can send an e-mail and get a response (and maybe even a post) the same day.
There's no editorial board or PR person involved. There's no pipeline your
message has to go through.
These guys are actually hungry for fresh meat. They thrive on being
tastemakers, finding the new thing, and getting the ball rolling. That's why many
big-time reporters now use these smaller sites to find new stories. Stories that
start on the fringe can go mainstream quickly.
We've been written up in big mainstream publications like Wired and Time,
but we've found that we actually get more hits when we're profiled on sites like
Daring Fireball, a site for Mac nerds, or Lifehacker, a productivity site. Links
from these places result in notable spikes in our traffic and sales. Articles in bigtime publications are nice, but they don't result in the same level of direct, instant
activity.

Drug dealers get it right
Drug dealers are astute businesspeople. They know their product is so good
they're willing to give a little away for free upfront. They know you'll be back
for more--with money.
Emulate drug dealers. Make your product so good, so addictive, so "can't
miss" that giving customers a small, free taste makes them come back with cash
in hand.
This will force you to make something about your product bite-size. You want
an easily digestible introduction to what you sell. This gives people a way to try
it without investing any money or a lot of time.
Bakeries, restaurants, and ice cream shops have done this successfully for
years. Car dealers let you test-drive cars before buying them. Software firms are
also getting on board, with free trials or limited-use versions. How many other
industries could benefit from the drug-dealer model?
Don't be afraid to give a little away for free--as long as you've got something
else to sell. Be confident in what you're offering. You should know that people
will come back for more. If you're not confident about that, you haven't created a
strong enough product.
Marketing is not a department
Do you have a marketing department? If not, good. If you do, don't think these
are the only people responsible for marketing. Accounting is a department.
Marketing isn't. Marketing is something everyone in your company is doing
24/7/365.
Just as you cannot not communicate, you cannot not market:
Every time you answer the phone, it's marketing.
Every time you send an e-mail, it's marketing.
Every time someone uses your product, it's marketing.
Every word you write on your Web site is marketing.
If you build software, every error message is marketing.
If you're in the restaurant business, the after-dinner mint is marketing.
If you're in the retail business, the checkout counter is marketing.
If you're in a service business, your invoice is marketing.
Recognize that all of these little things are more important than choosing
which piece of swag to throw into a conference goodie bag. Marketing isn't just
a few individual events. It's the sum total of everything you do.

The myth of the overnight sensation
You will not be a big hit right away. You will not get rich quick. You are not so
special that everyone else will instantly pay attention. No one cares about you.
At least not yet. Get used to it.
You know those overnight-success stories you've heard about? It's not the
whole story. Dig deeper and you'll usually find people who have busted their
asses for years to get into a position where things could take off. And on the rare
occasion that instant success does come along, it usually doesn't last--there's no
foundation there to support it.
Trade the dream of overnight success for slow, measured growth. It's hard, but
you have to be patient. You have to grind it out. You have to do it for a long time
before the right people notice.
You may think you can speed up the process by hiring a PR firm. Don't bother.
You're just not ready for that yet. For one thing, it's too expensive. Good PR
firms can cost upward of $10,000 per month. That's a waste of money right now.
Plus, you're still just a no-name with a product no one's ever heard about.
Who's going to write about that? Once you have some customers and a history,
you'll have a story to tell. But just launching isn't a good story.
And remember, great brands launch without PR campaigns all the time.
Starbucks, Apple, Nike, Amazon, Google, and Snapple all became great brands
over time, not because of a big PR push upfront.
Start building your audience today. Start getting people interested in what you
have to say. And then keep at it. In a few years, you too will get to chuckle when
people discuss your "overnight" success.
*Pilar Viladas, "The Talk: The Slow Lane," New York Times Magazine, Oct.
9, 2005, www.tinyurl.com/ychqtup
CHAPTER
HIRING

Do it yourself first
Never hire anyone to do a job until you've tried to do it yourself first. That way,
you'll understand the nature of the work. You'll know what a job well done looks
like. You'll know how to write a realistic job description and which questions to
ask in an interview. You'll know whether to hire someone full-time or part-time,
outsource it, or keep doing it yourself (the last is preferable, if possible).
You'll also be a much better manager, because you'll be supervising people
who are doing a job you've done before. You'll know when to criticize and when
to support.
At 37signals, we didn't hire a system administrator until one of us had spent a
whole summer setting up a bunch of servers on his own. For the first three years,
one of us did all of our customer support. Then we hired a dedicated support
person. We ran with the ball as far as we could before handing it off. That way,
we knew what we were looking for once we did decide to hire.
You may feel out of your element at times. You might even feel like you suck.
That's all right. You can hire your way out of that feeling or you can learn your
way out of it. Try learning first. What you give up in initial execution will be
repaid many times over by the wisdom you gain.
Plus, you should want to be intimately involved in all aspects of your
business. Otherwise you'll wind up in the dark, putting your fate solely in the
hands of others. That's dangerous.

Hire when it hurts
Don't hire for pleasure; hire to kill pain. Always ask yourself: What if we don't
hire anyone? Is that extra work that's burdening us really necessary? Can we
solve the problem with a slice of software or a change of practice instead? What
if we just don't do it?
Similarly, if you lose someone, don't replace him immediately. See how long
you can get by without that person and that position. You'll often discover you
don't need as many people as you think.
The right time to hire is when there's more work than you can handle for a
sustained period of time. There should be things you can't do anymore. You
should notice the quality level slipping. That's when you're hurting. And that's
when it's time to hire, not earlier.

Pass on great people
Some companies are addicted to hiring. Some even hire when they aren't hiring.
They'll hear about someone great and invent a position or title just to lure them
in. And there they'll sit--parked in a position that doesn't matter, doing work that
isn't important.
Pass on hiring people you don't need, even if you think that person's a great
catch. You'll be doing your company more harm than good if you bring in
talented people who have nothing important to do.
Problems start when you have more people than you need. You start inventing
work to keep everyone busy. Artificial work leads to artificial projects. And
those artificial projects lead to real costs and complexity.
Don't worry about "the one that got away." It's much worse to have people on
staff who aren't doing anything meaningful. There's plenty of talent out there.
When you do have a real need, you'll find someone who fits well.
Great has nothing to do with it. If you don't need someone, you don't need
someone.

Strangers at a cocktail party
If you go to a cocktail party where everyone is a stranger, the conversation is
dull and stiff. You make small talk about the weather, sports, TV shows, etc. You
shy away from serious conversations and controversial opinions.
A small, intimate dinner party among old friends is a different story, though.
There are genuinely interesting conversations and heated debates. At the end of
the night, you feel you actually got something out of it.
Hire a ton of people rapidly and a "strangers at a cocktail party" problem is
exactly what you end up with. There are always new faces around, so everyone
is unfailingly polite. Everyone tries to avoid any conflict or drama. No one says,
"This idea sucks." People appease instead of challenge.
And that appeasement is what gets companies into trouble. You need to be
able to tell people when they're full of crap. If that doesn't happen, you start
churning out something that doesn't offend anyone but also doesn't make anyone
fall in love.
You need an environment where everyone feels safe enough to be honest
when things get tough. You need to know how far you can push someone. You
need to know what people really mean when they say something.
So hire slowly. It's the only way to avoid winding up at a cocktail party of
strangers.

Resumes are ridiculous
We all know resumes are a joke. They're exaggerations. They're filled with
"action verbs" that don't mean anything. They list job titles and responsibilities
that are vaguely accurate at best. And there's no way to verify most of what's on
there. The whole thing is a farce.
Worst of all, they're too easy. Anyone can create a decent-enough resume.
That's why half-assed applicants love them so much. They can shotgun out
hundreds at a time to potential employers. It's another form of spam. They don't
care about landing your job; they just care about landing any job.
If someone sends out a resume to three hundred companies, that's a huge red
flag right there. There's no way that applicant has researched you. There's no
way he knows what's different about your company.
If you hire based on this garbage, you're missing the point of what hiring is
about. You want a specific candidate who cares specifically about your company,
your products, your customers, and your job.
So how do you find these candidates? First step: Check the cover letter. In a
cover letter, you get actual communication instead of a list of skills, verbs, and
years of irrelevance. There's no way an applicant can churn out hundreds of
personalized letters. That's why the cover letter is a much better test than a
resume. You hear someone's actual voice and are able recognize if it's in tune
with you and your company.
Trust your gut reaction. If the first paragraph sucks, the second has to work
that much harder. If there's no hook in the first three, it's unlikely there's a match
there. On the other hand, if your gut is telling you there's a chance at a real
match, then move on to the interview stage.

Years of irrelevance
We've all seen job ads that say, "Five years of experience required." That may
give you a number, but it tells you nothing.
Of course, requiring some baseline level of experience can be a good idea
when hiring. It makes sense to go after candidates with six months to a year of
experience. It takes that long to internalize the idioms, learn how things work,
understand the relevant tools, etc.
But after that, the curve flattens out. There's surprisingly little difference
between a candidate with six months of experience and one with six years. The
real difference comes from the individual's dedication, personality, and
intelligence.
How do you really measure this stuff anyway? What does five years of
experience mean? If you spent a couple of weekends experimenting with
something a few years back, can you count that as a year of experience? How is
a company supposed to verify these claims? These are murky waters.
How long someone's been doing it is overrated. What matters is how well
they've been doing it.
Forget about formal education
I have never let my schooling
interfere with my education.
--MARK TWAIN
There are plenty of companies out there who have educational requirements.
They'll only hire people with a college degree (sometimes in a specific field) or
an advanced degree or a certain GPA or certification of some sort or some other
requirement.
Come on. There are plenty of intelligent people who don't excel in the
classroom. Don't fall into the trap of thinking you need someone from one of the
"best" schools in order to get results. Ninety percent of CEOs currently heading
the top five hundred American companies did not receive undergraduate degrees
from Ivy League colleges. In fact, more received their undergraduate degrees
from the University of Wisconsin than from Harvard (the most heavily
represented Ivy school, with nine CEOs).
*
Too much time in academia can actually do you harm. Take writing, for
example. When you get out of school, you have to unlearn so much of the way
they teach you to write there. Some of the misguided lessons you learn in
academia:
The longer a document is, the more it matters.
Stiff, formal tone is better than being conversational.
Using big words is impressive.
You need to write a certain number of words or pages to make a point.
The format matters as much (or more) than the content of what you write.
It's no wonder so much business writing winds up dry, wordy, and dripping
with nonsense. People are just continuing the bad habits they picked up in
school. It's not just academic writing, either. There are a lot of skills that are
useful in academia that aren't worth much outside of it.
Bottom line: The pool of great candidates is far bigger than just people who
completed college with a stellar GPA. Consider dropouts, people who had low
GPAs, community-college students, and even those who just went to high
school.

Everybody works
With a small team, you need people who are going to do work, not delegate
work. Everyone's got to be producing. No one can be above the work.
That means you need to avoid hiring delegators, those people who love telling
others what to do. Delegators are dead weight for a small team. They clog the
pipes for others by coming up with busywork. And when they run out of work to
assign, they make up more--regardless of whether it needs to be done.
Delegators love to pull people into meetings, too. In fact, meetings are a
delegator's best friend. That's where he gets to seem important. Meanwhile,
everyone else who attends is pulled away from getting real work done.

Hire managers of one
Managers of one are people who come up with their own goals and execute
them. They don't need heavy direction. They don't need daily check-ins. They do
what a manager would do--set the tone, assign items, determine what needs to
get done, etc.--but they do it by themselves and for themselves.
These people free you from oversight. They set their own direction. When you
leave them alone, they surprise you with how much they've gotten done. They
don't need a lot of hand-holding or supervision.
How can you spot these people? Look at their backgrounds. They have set the
tone for how they've worked at other jobs. They've run something on their own
or launched some kind of project.
You want someone who's capable of building something from scratch and
seeing it through. Finding these people frees the rest of your team to work more
and manage less.

Hire great writers
If you are trying to decide among a few people to fill a position, hire the best
writer. It doesn't matter if that person is a marketer, salesperson, designer,
programmer, or whatever; their writing skills will pay off.
That's because being a good writer is about more than writing. Clear writing is
a sign of clear thinking. Great writers know how to communicate. They make
things easy to understand. They can put themselves in someone else's shoes.
They know what to omit. And those are qualities you want in any candidate.
Writing is making a comeback all over our society. Look at how much people
e-mail and text-message now rather than talk on the phone. Look at how much
communication happens via instant messaging and blogging. Writing is today's
currency for good ideas.
The best are everywhere
It's crazy not to hire the best people just because they live far away. Especially
now that there's so much technology out there making it easier to bring everyone
together online.
Our headquarters are in Chicago, but more than half of our team lives
elsewhere. We've got people in Spain, Canada, Idaho, Oklahoma, and elsewhere.
Had we limited our search only to people in Chicago, we would have missed out
on half of the great people we have.
To make sure your remote team stays in touch, have at least a few hours a day
of real-time overlap. Working in time zones where there's no workday overlap at
all is tough. If you face that situation, someone might need to shift hours a bit so
they start a little later or earlier in the day, so you're available at the same time.
You don't need eight hours of overlap, though. (Actually, we've found it
preferable to not have complete overlap--you get more alone time that way.) Two
to four hours of overlap should be plenty.
Also, meet in person once in a while. You should see each other at least every
few months. We make sure our whole team gets together a few times a year.
These are great times to review progress, discuss what's going right or wrong,
plan for the future, and get reacquainted with one another on a personal level.
Geography just doesn't matter anymore. Hire the best talent, regardless of
where it is.

Test-drive employees
Interviews are only worth so much. Some people sound like pros but don't work
like pros. You need to evaluate the work they can do now, not the work they say
they did in the past.
The best way to do that is to actually see them work. Hire them for a
miniproject, even if it's for just twenty or forty hours. You'll see how they make
decisions. You'll see if you get along. You'll see what kind of questions they ask.
You'll get to judge them by their actions instead of just their words.
You can even make up a fake project. In a factory in South Carolina, BMW
built a simulated assembly line where job candidates get ninety minutes to
perform a variety of work-related tasks.
*
Cessna, the airplane manufacturer, has a role-playing exercise for prospective
managers that simulates the day of an executive. Candidates work through
memos, deal with (phony) irate customers, and handle other problems. Cessna
has hired more than a hundred people using this simulation.
+
These companies have realized that when you get into a real work
environment, the truth comes out. It's one thing to look at a portfolio, read a
resume, or conduct an interview. It's another to actually work with someone.
*Carol Hymowitz, "Any College Will Do," Wall Street Journal, Sept. 18,
2006, online.wsj.com/article/SB115853818747665842.html
*Peter Carbonara, "Hire for Attitude, Train for Skill," Fast Company, Dec.
18, 2007, www.fastcompany.com/magazine/04/hiring.html
+Ibid.
CHAPTER
DAMAGE CONTROL
Own your bad news
When something goes wrong, someone is going to tell the story. You'll be better
off if it's you. Otherwise, you create an opportunity for rumors, hearsay, and
false information to spread.
When something bad happens, tell your customers (even if they never noticed
in the first place). Don't think you can just sweep it under the rug. You can't hide
anymore. These days, someone else will call you on it if you don't do it yourself.
They'll post about it online and everyone will know. There are no more secrets.
People will respect you more if you are open, honest, public, and responsive
during a crisis. Don't hide behind spin or try to keep your bad news on the down
low. You want your customers to be as informed as possible.
Back in 1989, the Exxon Valdez oil tanker spilled 11 million gallons of oil into
Alaska's Prince William Sound. Exxon made the mistake of waiting a long time
before responding to the spill and sending aid to Alaska. Exxon's chairman failed
to go there until two weeks after the spill. The company held news briefings in
Valdez, a remote Alaskan town that was difficult for the press to reach. The
result: a PR disaster for Exxon that led the public to believe the company was
either hiding something or didn't really care about what had happened.
*
Contrast that Exxon story to the rupture of an Ashland Oil storage tank that
spilled oil into a river near Pittsburgh around the same time. Ashland Oil's
chairman, John Hall, went to the scene of the Ashland spill and took charge. He
pledged to clean everything up. He visited news bureaus to explain what the
company would do and answer any questions. Within a day, he had shifted the
story from a rotten-oil-company-does-evil narrative to a good-oil-company-triesto-clean-up story.
+
Here are some tips on how you can own the story:
The message should come from the top. The highest-ranking person
available should take control in a forceful way.
Spread the message far and wide. Use whatever megaphone you have.
Don't try to sweep it under the rug.
"No comment" is not an option.
Apologize the way a real person would and explain what happened in
detail.
Honestly be concerned about the fate of your customers--then prove it.

Speed changes everything
"Your call is very important to us. We appreciate your patience. The average
hold time right now is sixteen minutes." Give me a fucking break.
Getting back to people quickly is probably the most important thing you can
do when it comes to customer service. It's amazing how much that can defuse a
bad situation and turn it into a good one.
Have you ever sent an e-mail and it took days or weeks for the company to get
back to you? How did it make you feel? These days, that's what people have
come to expect. They're used to being put on hold. They're used to platitudes
about "caring" that aren't backed up.
That's why so many support queries start off with an antagonistic tone. Some
people may even make threats or call you names. Don't take it personally. They
think that's the only way to be heard. They're only trying to be a squeaky wheel
in hopes it'll get them a little grease.
Once you answer quickly, they shift 180 degrees. They light up. They become
extra polite. Often they thank you profusely.
It's especially true if you offer a personal response. Customers are so used to
canned answers, you can really differentiate yourself by answering thoughtfully
and showing that you're listening. And even if you don't have a perfect answer,
say something. "Let me do some research and get back to you" can work
wonders.

How to say you're sorry
There's never really a great way to say you're sorry, but there are plenty of
terrible ways.
One of the worst ways is the non-apology apology, which sounds like an
apology but doesn't really accept any blame. For example, "We're sorry if this
upset you." Or "I'm sorry that you don't feel we lived up to your expectations."
Whatever.
A good apology accepts responsibility. It has no conditional if phrase attached.
It shows people that the buck stops with you. And then it provides real details
about what happened and what you're doing to prevent it from happening again.
And it seeks a way to make things right.
Here's another bad one: "We apologize for any inconvenience this may have
caused." Oh, please. Let's break down why that's bad:
"We apologize ..." If you spilled coffee on someone while riding the subway,
would you say, "I apologize"? No, you'd say, "I'm so, so sorry!" Well, if your
service is critical to your customers, an interruption to that service is like spilling
hot coffee all over them. So use the appropriate tone and language to show that
you understand the severity of what happened. Also, the person in charge should
take personal responsibility. An "I" apology is a lot stronger than a "we"
apology.
"... any inconvenience ..." If customers depend on your service and can't get
to it, it's not merely an inconvenience. It's a crisis. An inconvenience is a long
line at the grocery store. This ain't that.
"... this may have caused" The "may" here implies there might not be
anything wrong at all. That's a classic non-apology apology move. It slights the
very real problem(s) that customers are experiencing. If this didn't affect them,
you don't really need to say anything. If it did affect them, then there's no need
for "may" here. Stop wavering.
So what's the perfect way to say you're sorry? There's no magic bullet. Any
stock answer will sound generic and hollow. You're going to have to take it on a
case-by-case basis.
The number-one principle to keep in mind when you apologize: How would
you feel about the apology if you were on the other end? If someone said those
words to you, would you believe them?
Keep in mind that you can't apologize your way out of being an ass. Even the
best apology won't rescue you if you haven't earned people's trust. Everything
you do before things go wrong matters far more than the actual words you use to
apologize. If you've built rapport with customers, they'll cut you some slack and
trust you when you say you're sorry.
Put everyone on the front lines
In the restaurant business, there's a world of difference between working in the
kitchen and dealing with customers. Cooking schools and smart restaurateurs
know it's important for both sides to understand and empathize with each other.
That's why they often have chefs work out front as waiters for a stretch. That
way, the kitchen staff can interact with customers and see what it's actually like
on the front lines.
A lot of companies have a similar front-of-house/back-of-house split. The
people who make the product work in the "kitchen" while support handles the
customers. Unfortunately, that means the product's chefs never get to directly
hear what customers are saying. Too bad. Listening to customers is the best way
to get in tune with a product's strengths and weaknesses.
Think about the children's game Telephone. There are ten kids sitting in a
circle. A message starts and is whispered from one child to another. By the time
it gets all the way around, the message is completely distorted--to the point
where it's usually hilarious. A sentence that makes sense at first comes out the
other end as "Macaroni cantaloupe knows the future." And the more people you
have in the circle, the more distorted the message gets.
The same thing is true at your company. The more people you have between
your customers' words and the people doing the work, the more likely it is that
the message will get lost or distorted along the way.
Everyone on your team should be connected to your customers--maybe not
every day, but at least a few times throughout the year. That's the only way your
team is going to feel the hurt your customers are experiencing. It's feeling the
hurt that really motivates people to fix the problem. And the flip side is true too:
The joy of happy customers or ones who have had a problem solved can also be
wildly motivating.
So don't protect the people doing the work from customer feedback. No one
should be shielded from direct criticism.
Maybe you think you don't have time to interact with customers. Then make
time. Craigslist founder Craig Newmark still answers support e-mails today
(often within minutes). He also deletes racist comments from the site's
discussion boards and pesters New York City Realtors who post apartments for
rent that don't exist.
*
If he can devote this kind of attention to customer service,
you can too.

Take a deep breath
When you rock the boat, there will be waves. After you introduce a new feature,
change a policy, or remove something, knee-jerk reactions will pour in. Resist
the urge to panic or make rapid changes in response. Passions flare in the
beginning. That's normal. But if you ride out that first rocky week, things usually
settle down.
People are creatures of habit. That's why they react to change in such a
negative way. They're used to using something in a certain way and any change
upsets the natural order of things. So they push back. They complain. They
demand that you revert to the way things were.
But that doesn't mean you should act. Sometimes you need to go ahead with a
decision you believe in, even if it's unpopular at first.
People often respond before they give a change a fair chance. Sometimes that
initial negative reaction is more of a primal response. That's why you'll
sometimes hear things like, "It's the worst thing I've ever seen." No, it's not. It's a
minor change. Come on.
Also, remember that negative reactions are almost always louder and more
passionate than positive ones. In fact, you may hear only negative voices even
when the majority of your customers are happy about a change. Make sure you
don't foolishly backpedal on a necessary but controversial decision.
So when people complain, let things simmer for a while. Let them know
you're listening. Show them you're aware of what they're saying. Let them know
you understand their discontent. But explain that you're going to let it go for a
while and see what happens. You'll probably find that people will adjust
eventually. They may even wind up liking the change more than the old way,
once they get used to it.
*Reyna Susi, "The Exxon Crisis, 1989," Effective Crisis Management,
iml.jou.ufl.edu/projects/Fall02/Susi/exxon.htm
+John Holusha, "Exxon's Public-Relations Problem," New York Times, Apr.
21, 1989, www.tinyurl.com/yg2bgff
*Scott Kirsner, "Craigslist's Unorthodox Path," Boston Globe, June 15, 2008,
www.tinyurl.com/4vkg58
CHAPTER
CULTURE
You don't create a culture
Instant cultures are artificial cultures. They're big bangs made of mission
statements, declarations, and rules. They are obvious, ugly, and plastic. Artificial
culture is paint. Real culture is patina.
You don't create a culture. It happens. This is why new companies don't have a
culture. Culture is the byproduct of consistent behavior. If you encourage people
to share, then sharing will be built into your culture. If you reward trust, then
trust will be built in. If you treat customers right, then treating customers right
becomes your culture.
Culture isn't a foosball table or trust falls. It isn't policy. It isn't the Christmas
party or the company picnic. Those are objects and events, not culture. And it's
not a slogan, either. Culture is action, not words.
So don't worry too much about it. Don't force it. You can't install a culture.
Like a fine scotch, you've got to give it time to develop.
Decisions are temporary
"But what if ...?" "What happens when ...?" "Don't we need to plan for ...?"
Don't make up problems you don't have yet. It's not a problem until it's a real
problem. Most of the things you worry about never happen anyway.
Besides, the decisions you make today don't need to last forever. It's easy to
shoot down good ideas, interesting policies, or worthwhile experiments by
assuming that whatever you decide now needs to work for years on end. It's just
not so, especially for a small business. If circumstances change, your decisions
can change. Decisions are temporary.
At this stage, it's silly to worry about whether or not your concept will scale
from five to five thousand people (or from a hundred thousand to 100 million
people). Getting a product or service off the ground is hard enough without
inventing even more obstacles. Optimize for now and worry about the future
later.
The ability to change course is one of the big advantages of being small.
Compared with larger competitors, you're way more capable of making quick,
sweeping changes. Big companies just can't move that fast. So pay attention to
today and worry about later when it gets here. Otherwise you'll waste energy,
time, and money fixating on problems that may never materialize.

Skip the rock stars
A lot of companies post help-wanted ads seeking "rock stars" or "ninjas." Lame.
Unless your workplace is filled with groupies and throwing stars, these words
have nothing to do with your business.
Instead of thinking about how you can land a roomful of rock stars, think
about the room instead. We're all capable of bad, average, and great work. The
environment has a lot more to do with great work than most people realize.
That's not to say we're all created equal and you'll unlock star power in anyone
with a rock star environment. But there's a ton of untapped potential trapped
under lame policies, poor direction, and stifling bureaucracies. Cut the crap and
you'll find that people are waiting to do great work. They just need to be given
the chance.
This isn't about casual Fridays or bring-your-dog-to-work day. (If those are
such good things, then why aren't you doing them every day of the week?)
Rockstar environments develop out of trust, autonomy, and responsibility.
They're a result of giving people the privacy, workspace, and tools they deserve.
Great environments show respect for the people who do the work and how they
do it.

They're not thirteen
When you treat people like children, you get children's work. Yet that's exactly
how a lot of companies and managers treat their employees. Employees need to
ask permission before they can do anything. They need to get approval for every
tiny expenditure. It's surprising they don't have to get a hall pass to go take a
shit.
When everything constantly needs approval, you create a culture of
nonthinkers. You create a boss-versus-worker relationship that screams, "I don't
trust you."
What do you gain if you ban employees from, say, visiting a socialnetworking site or watching YouTube while at work? You gain nothing. That
time doesn't magically convert to work. They'll just find some other diversion.
And look, you're not going to get a full eight hours a day out of people
anyway. That's a myth. They might be at the office for eight hours, but they're
not actually working eight hours. People need diversions. It helps disrupt the
monotony of the workday. A little YouTube or Facebook time never hurt anyone.
Then there's all the money and time you spend policing this stuff. How much
does it cost to set up surveillance software? How much time do IT employees
waste on monitoring other employees instead of working on a project that's
actually valuable? How much time do you waste writing rule books that never
get read? Look at the costs and you quickly realize that failing to trust your
employees is awfully expensive.

Send people home at 5
The dream employee for a lot of companies is a twenty-something with as little
of a life as possible outside of work--someone who'll be fine working fourteenhour days and sleeping under his desk.
But packing a room full of these burn-the-midnight-oil types isn't as great as it
seems. It lets you get away with lousy execution. It perpetuates myths like "This
is the only way we can compete against the big guys." You don't need more
hours; you need better hours.
When people have something to do at home, they get down to business. They
get their work done at the office because they have somewhere else to be. They
find ways to be more efficient because they have to. They need to pick up the
kids or get to choir practice. So they use their time wisely.
As the saying goes, "If you want something done, ask the busiest person you
know." You want busy people. People who have a life outside of work. People
who care about more than one thing. You shouldn't expect the job to be
someone's entire life--at least not if you want to keep them around for a long
time.

Don't scar on the first cut
The second something goes wrong, the natural tendency is to create a policy.
"Someone's wearing shorts!? We need a dress code!" No, you don't. You just
need to tell John not to wear shorts again.
Policies are organizational scar tissue. They are codified overreactions to
situations that are unlikely to happen again. They are collective punishment for
the misdeeds of an individual.
This is how bureaucracies are born. No one sets out to create a bureaucracy.
They sneak up on companies slowly. They are created one policy--one scar--at a
time.
So don't scar on the first cut. Don't create a policy because one person did
something wrong once. Policies are only meant for situations that come up over
and over again.
Sound like you
What is it with businesspeople trying to sound big? The stiff language, the
formal announcements, the artificial friendliness, the legalese, etc. You read this
stuff and it sounds like a robot wrote it. These companies talk at you, not to you.
This mask of professionalism is a joke. We all know this. Yet small companies
still try to emulate it. They think sounding big makes them appear bigger and
more "professional." But it really just makes them sound ridiculous. Plus, you
sacrifice one of a small company's greatest assets: the ability to communicate
simply and directly, without running every last word through a legal-and PRdepartment sieve.
There's nothing wrong with sounding your own size. Being honest about who
you are is smart business, too. Language is often your first impression--why start
it off with a lie? Don't be afraid to be you.
That applies to the language you use everywhere--in e-mail, packaging,
interviews, blog posts, presentations, etc. Talk to customers the way you would
to friends. Explain things as if you were sitting next to them. Avoid jargon or any
sort of corporate-speak. Stay away from buzzwords when normal words will do
just fine. Don't talk about "monetization" or being "transparent;" talk about
making money and being honest. Don't use seven words when four will do.
And don't force your employees to end e-mails with legalese like "This e-mail
message is for the sole use of the intended recipient(s) and may contain
confidential and privileged information." That's like ending all your company emails with a signature that says, "We don't trust you and we're ready to prove it
in court." Good luck making friends that way.
Write to be read, don't write just to write. Whenever you write something,
read it out loud. Does it sound the way it would if you were actually talking to
someone? If not, how can you make it more conversational?
Who said writing needs to be formal? Who said you have to strip away your
personality when putting words on paper? Forget rules. Communicate!
And when you're writing, don't think about all the people who may read your
words. Think of one person. Then write for that one person. Writing for a mob
leads to generalities and awkwardness. When you write to a specific target,
you're a lot more likely to hit the mark.

Four-letter words
There are four-letter words you should never use in business. They're not fuck or
shit. They're need, must, can't, easy, just, only, and fast. These words get in the
way of healthy communication. They are red flags that introduce animosity,
torpedo good discussions, and cause projects to be late.
When you use these four-letter words, you create a black-and-white situation.
But the truth is rarely black and white. So people get upset and problems ensue.
Tension and conflict are injected unnecessarily.
Here's what's wrong with some of them:
Need. Very few things actually need to get done. Instead of saying "need,"
you're better off saying "maybe" or "What do you think about this?" or "How
does this sound?" or "Do you think we could get away with that?"
Can't. When you say "can't," you probably can. Sometimes there are even
opposing can'ts: "We can't launch it like that, because it's not quite right"
versus "We can't spend any more time on this because we have to launch."
Both of those statements can't be true. Or wait a minute, can they?
Easy. Easy is a word that's used to describe other people's jobs. "That should
be easy for you to do, right?" But notice how rarely people describe their own
tasks as easy. For you, it's "Let me look into it"--but for others, it's "Get it
done."
These four-letter words often pop up during debates (and also watch out for
their cousins: everyone, no one, always, and never). Once uttered, they make it
tough to find a solution. They box you into a corner by pitting two absolutes
against each other. That's when head-butting occurs. You squeeze out any middle
ground.
And these words are especially dangerous when you string them together:
"We need to add this feature now. We can't launch without this feature. Everyone
wants it. It's only one little thing so it will be easy. You should be able to get it in
there fast!" Only thirty-six words, but a hundred assumptions. That's a recipe for
disaster.

ASAP is poison
Stop saying ASAP. We get it. It's implied. Everyone wants things done as soon
as they can be done.
When you turn into one of these people who adds ASAP to the end of every
request, you're saying everything is high priority. And when everything is high
priority, nothing is. (Funny how everything is a top priority until you actually
have to prioritize things.) ASAP is inflationary. It devalues any request that
doesn't say ASAP. Before you know it, the only way to get anything done is by
putting the ASAP sticker on it.
Most things just don't warrant that kind of hysteria. If a task doesn't get done
this very instant, nobody is going to die. Nobody's going to lose their job. It
won't cost the company a ton of money. What it will do is create artificial stress,
which leads to burnout and worse.
So reserve your use of emergency language for true emergencies. The kind
where there are direct, measurable consequences to inaction. For everything else,
chill out.
CHAPTER
CONCLUSION

Inspiration is perishable
We all have ideas. Ideas are immortal. They last forever.
What doesn't last forever is inspiration. Inspiration is like fresh fruit or milk: It
has an expiration date.
If you want to do something, you've got to do it now. You can't put it on a
shelf and wait two months to get around to it. You can't just say you'll do it later.
Later, you won't be pumped up about it anymore.
If you're inspired on a Friday, swear off the weekend and dive into the project.
When you're high on inspiration, you can get two weeks of work done in twentyfour hours. Inspiration is a time machine in that way.
Inspiration is a magical thing, a productivity multiplier, a motivator. But it
won't wait for you. Inspiration is a now thing. If it grabs you, grab it right back
and put it to work.
Thank you for reading our book
We hope it inspires you to rework how you do things. If so, drop a line to
rework@37signals.com and let us know how it's going. We look forward to
hearing from you.
CHAPTER
RESOURCES
About 37signals
37signals
www.37signals.com
About 37signals and our products.
Rework site
www.37signals.com/rework
The official book site.
Signal vs. Noise
www.37signals.com/svn
Our company blog about business, design, culture, and more.
37signals video
www.37signals.com/speaks
Presentations and rants by 37signals.
Subscribe to 37signals newsletters
www.37signals.com/subscribe
Newsletter about new products, discounts, and more (sent out roughly twice a
month).
Stuff we like
www.37signals.com/stuffwelike
A list of books, sites, and other things that we enjoy.
E-mail
rework@37signals.com
37signals products
Basecamp
www.basecamphq.com
Manage projects and collaborate with your team and clients.
Highrise
www.highrisehq.com
Track your contacts, leads, and deals. Always be prepared.
Backpack
www.backpackit.com
Organize and share information across your business.
Campfire
www.campfirenow.com
Real-time chat and file and code sharing for remote teams.
Ta-da List
www.tadalist.com
Ta-da List makes it easy to create and share your to-do's.
Writeboard
www.writeboard.com
Writeboard is a collaborative writing tool.
Getting Real
gettingreal.37signals.com
This book by 37signals will help you discover the smarter, faster, easier way to
build a successful Web-based application.
Ruby on Rails
www.rubyonrails.org
An open-source Web framework created by 37signals.
Acknowledgments
Very special thanks go to Matthew Linderman. Matt was 37signals' first
employee in 1999--and he's still with the company today. This book wouldn't
have come together without Matt. In addition to writing original content, he
helped merge the distinctly different writing styles of the coauthors into a
focused, cohesive book. He made it look easy, but it wasn't easy work. Thank
you, Matt.
We also want to thank our families, our customers, and everyone at 37signals.
And here's a list of some of the people we know, and don't know, who have
inspired us in one way or another:
Frank Lloyd Wright Seth Godin
Warren Buffett Jamie Larson
Clayton Christensen Ralph Nader
Jim Coudal Benjamin Franklin
Ernest Kim Jeff Bezos
Scott Heiferman Antoni Gaudi
Carlos Segura Larry David
Steve Jobs Dean Kamen
Bill Maher Thomas Jefferson
Mies van der Rohe Ricardo Semler
Christopher Alexander James Dyson
Kent Beck Thomas Paine
Gerald Weinberg Kathy Sierra
Julia Child Marc Hedlund
Nicholas Karavites Michael Jordan
Richard Bird Jeffrey Zeldman
Dieter Rams Judith Sheindlin
Ron Paul Timothy Ferriss
Copyright (c) 2010 by 37signals, LLC.
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Crown Business of the Crown Publishing
Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
CROWN and the Crown colophon are registered trademarks of Random House,
Inc.
This book is available for special discounts for bulk purchases for sales
promotions or premiums. Special editions, including personalized covers,
excerpts of existing books, and corporate imprints, can be created in large
quantities for special needs. For more information, write to Random House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Fried, Jason.
Rework / Jason Fried and David Hansson.--1st ed.
p. cm.
1. Industrial management. 2. 37signals--company.
I. Hansson, David Heinemeier. II. Title.
HD31.F755 2010
658.22--dc22 2009036114
eISBN: 978-0-307-46376-0
rohdesign.com
v3.0
